Contents
Title page
1
About the Author
3
Bibliography
6
Introduction
8
1) General Improvement
12
2) Thought Process
73
3) Psychology
126
4) Tactics/Safety
160
5) Positional Concepts and Strategy
201
6) Openings
247
7) Endgames
283
Epilogue
304
Maximize Your Chess Potential
Dan Heisman
Copyright © 2025 Dan Heisman
Maximize Your Chess Potential
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission of the publisher.
ISBN (hardback) 978-1-83684-018-3
ISBN (paperback) 978-1-83684-006-0
ISBN (ebook) 978-1-83684-030-5
All sales or enquiries should be directed to
Popular Chess
Suite 442
Baltic Chambers
50 Wellington Street,
Glasgow G2 6HJ
United Kingdom
e-mail: info@popularchess.com
website: www.popularchess.com
Distributed in North America by National Book Network
Distributed in Rest of the World by Quality Chess UK Ltd through
Sunrise Handicrafts, ul. Szarugi 61, 21-002 Marysin, Poland
Popular Chess Series
Commissioning editor: Byron Jacobs
Book production by First Rank Publishing, Brighton
Cover by Kallia Kleisarchaki
Printed in Estonia by Tallinna Raamatutrükikoja LLC
About the Author
Dan Heisman
is a United States Chess Federation National Master, author and instructor. He is well regarded for his practical advice on a wide range of key subjects including general improvement, thought processes, planning, strategy, tactics, endgame play and technique.
Also by the Author:
A Guide to Chess Improvement
Bibliography
Books
Albert and Lawrence,
Chess Rules of Thumb
(CIRC, 2003)
Bain,
Chess Tactics for Students
(self-published, 2002)
Barden,
The Batsford Chess Puzzle Book
(Batsford, 2004)
Coakley,
Winning Chess Exercises for Kids
(Chess’n Math Association, 2004)
Coakley,
Winning Chess Puzzles for Kids Vol I
(Chess’n Math Association, 2006)
Coakley,
Winning Chess Puzzles for Kids Vol II
(Chess’n Math Association, 2010)
Coakley,
Winning Chess Strategy for Kids
(Chess’n Math Association, 2004)
De Firmian,
Modern Chess Openings
(15th edition, Random House, 2008)
De Groot,
Thought and Choice in Chess
(Basic Books, 1965)
De la Maza,
Rapid Chess Improvement
(Everyman Chess, 2002)
Evans,
New Ideas in Chess
(Cornerstone Library, 1967)
Fischer,
My 60 Memorable Games
(Simon and Schuster, 1969)
Giannatos,
Everyone’s First Chess Workbook
(New in Chess, 2021)
Heisman,
Back to Basics: Tactics
(Russell Enterprises, 2021)
Heisman,
Elements of Positional Evaluation
(4th edition, Russell Enterprises, 2010)
Heisman,
Is Your Move Safe?
(Mongoose Press, 2016)
Heisman,
The Improving Chess Thinker
(2nd edition, Mongoose Press, 2014)
Hendriks,
Move First and Think Later
(New in Chess, 2014)
Hertan,
Power Chess for Kids Vol 1
(New in Chess, 2011)
Hochberg,
Chess Braintwisters
(Sterling Publishing, 1999_
Horowitz and Mott-Smith
, Point Count Chess
(McKay, 1972)
Kaufman,
The Kaufman Repertoire in Black and White
(New in Chess, 2012)
Lakdawala,
Irrational Chess
(Everyman Chess, 2023)
Lakdawala,
Tactical Training in the Endgame
(Everyman Chess, 2021)
Lasker,
Common Sense in Chess
(Dover, 1965)
Levitt,
Genius in Chess
(Batsford, 1997)
Neiman,
Tune Your Chess Tactics Antenna
(New in Chess, 2012)
Neiman and Afek,
Invisible Chess Moves
(New in Chess, 2011)
New in Chess,
Comprehensive Chess Openings Vol 1-3
(New in Chess, 2008-2009)
Perelshteyn and Solon,
Evaluate Like a Grandmaster
(self-published, 2022)
Rowson,
Chess for Zebras
(Gambit Publications, 2005)
Rowson
, The Seven Deadly Chess Sins
(Gambit Publications, 2000)
Rowson,
Understanding the Grünfeld
(Gambit Publications, 1999)
Silman,
How To Reassess Your Chess
(4th edition, Siles Press, 2010)
Silman
, Silman’s Complete Endgame Course
(Siles Press, 2007)
Soltis,
Grandmaster Secrets: Openings
(Thinker’s Press, 2002)
Soltis,
Rethinking the Chess Pieces
(Batsford, 2004)
Soltis,
The Wisest Things Ever Said About Chess
(Batsford, 2008)
Tal,
Tal-Botvinnik 1960
(Russell Enterprises, 1970)
Vigus,
The Pirc in Black and White
(Everyman Chess, 2007)
Watson,
Mastering the Chess Openings Vol. 1-4
(Gambit Publications, 2006)
Watson,
Secrets of Modern Chess Strategy
(Gambit Publications, 1998)
Articles
Kaufman, ‘The Evaluation of Material Imbalances’ (
Chess Life
, March 1999)
Introduction
In 2009 I was hearing more and more about the concept of social media. To me it seemed a way of using the World Wide Web to communicate quickly, and simultaneously, with many people all over the planet with similar interests. As a chess instructor and author, I asked myself: ‘How can I best make use of social media to help as many prospective improving chess players as possible?’ I came across Twitter and decided that every day I could publish a chess ‘tip’ and everyone could read it, benefit, and/or comment.
I joined Twitter in 2009 and, since 2011, have been publishing a Chess Tip of the Day at www.twitter.com/danheisman. If you go to that URL on a browser and scroll down, you can find about 4,000 chess ‘tips’, and growing by one every day. I do tweet about other things on Twitter, so I differentiate my tips by starting them with an abbreviated month/day, e.g. M17 = May 17 or N8 = November 8. In this book the dates are irrelevant, so they have been removed.
In 2021, the Chess Journalists of America voted my Chess Tip of the Day the ‘Best Twitter Feed’ award. As I write this, I am awaiting to see if my Twitter tips win another award.
What is a chess ‘tip’? It is a suggestion; something I think might help a person play chess better, think more efficiently, refer to a website or media for some recommendation, draw attention to something interesting, publicize events, or just enjoy the world of chess better.
In that sense my tips – and thus the contents of this book – differ from similar works such as Alburt and Lawrence’s
Chess Rules of Thumb
, which contains primarily principles/rules or Soltis’s
The Wisest Things Ever Said About Chess,
which are ‘wise’, but not necessarily all suggestions. There is some overlap, of course, between this book and those predecessors. I can (and will!) offer some principles as suggestions to improve play, or suggest that a wise statement might contain good advice to follow.
As readers might know, Twitter was originally limited to 140 characters, but a few years ago, expanded to 280 per tweet. However, publishers were not interested in a book of ‘The Best of Chess Tip of the Day’ that were just hundreds if not thousands of copied and pasted short tips from my Twitter page – especially since they were available online for free! For this reason, I have expanded each tip to 1-4 pages of additional material not found on Twitter.
Therefore, this book is much more than just some of my best tips. I have selected tips that were not just the most helpful, but also ones that could be expanded with additional text and/or examples. I have been teaching chess for over 50(!) years and full-time since 1996, so many of these tips represent ways to highlight and address the most common problems I have found in students of all levels, offering suggested ways they can help mitigate or maybe even avoid these problems and/or improve their play and study. While many players at the same level may have similar problems in a skill-like analysis, they can also differ greatly in other areas, such as playing too fast or slow, or in their knowledge of openings, exact endgames, or principles.
As an instructor, the tips I offer often lean toward general improvement advice, rather than how to play very specific positions. So it is unlikely you will find too many tips comparable to: “When playing Black in the 6 Bg5 lines in the Najdorf variation of the Sicilian Defense, you will more often develop your queen’s knight with ...Nb8-d7 than you would ...Nb8-c6.” Or: “In the Lucena endgame if the defending king moves on to the sixth rank, consider using it as a shield for the offensive king to possibly move safely along the eighth rank to threaten promotion.” For these types of ‘position-specific’ tips, perhaps it would be better to consult reference material about how to play the Najdorf or one about ‘exact’ endgame technique.
When expanding the included tips into a page or more, I was able to turn this manuscript into much more than just suggestions; the expanded tips contain additional helpful material, including illustrative stories and many diagrams with instructive play. Much of this expanded material is either typical of, or verbatim, what I would use as part of a lesson, so in that sense many of the tips can be considered ‘Best Mini-Lessons of an Old Coach’!
On that note, the first book I wrote for Everyman was
A Guide to Chess Improvement: the Best of Novice Nook
. I think in every sense a reader will find this book to be a great companion to that one, and consistent in my messaging to players wishing to improve.
Occasionally I hear someone say they initially judge a chess book by flipping through it and glancing at the diagrams to get a feel for the book; I am not sure this is the optimum way to evaluate a new book, but I hope this one at least meets the minimum requirements!
As with all books of this nature, most readers will find some tips more helpful than others. This is only natural, based on each player’s playing strength, perceived and actual weaknesses, and areas of interest. In that sense, the book does not have to be read from start to finish, as one might read a novel or, for that matter, many of my other chess books. Instead, you can peruse the book at your leisure, looking for tips that you find interesting or helpful. And it is likely that a tip you find unappealing today might be the key tip in a year or two that will get you out of a rut or slump! In that sense this book can be used either as a reference book or a straight read.
With this many tips, there will naturally be some overlap between tips that address the same subject like good time management, careful analysis, creating active pieces, or trying your best on every move. I have tried to provide adequate cross-references between tips, but there is going to be some purposeful synergism even between tips without a cross-reference which address similar topics. It is important to note that the text is written so that the great majority of the cross-references are there to be helpful to correlate or augment the suggestions, but it is not necessary to follow those cross-references in order to understand the referencing tip.
Occasionally one tip would lead directly or as a corollary to another tip. If there was sufficient material for the additional tip, I would make this a separate tip but, if not, I sometimes included additional related tips, usually with the note *Tip Alert!*.
Unlike my
The Improving Chess Thinker
or
Silman’s Endgame Course
, the material in this book is not meant to be arranged in any ascending order of difficulty. That is mostly due to the nature or tips and suggestions – they are not normally ‘you need to know this tip before you can read the next one.’ There are, however, a few tips that do flow naturally from a previous tip; in those few cases I tried to put the tips in consecutive order or at least reference the other tip. Similarly, many of the tips are general or involve overall improvement, so I decided to assign each tip, as best possible, to one of the following chapters:
• General Improvement
• Thought Process
• Psychology
• Tactics/Safety
• Positional Concepts and Strategy
• Openings
• Endgames
Middlegame issues are addressed primarily though Chapters Four (Tactics/Safety) and Five (Positional Concepts/Strategy). Further, because the tips are in subject order and not in order of priority, I have put the label
*Top-10 Tip*
after the ten tips I think might be most helpful to the average reader. However, each reader is invited to pick out their own ‘most helpful’ set, which will likely differ greatly from mine! Drop me an email via my website www.danheisman.com to let me know your ‘top ten’.
It almost goes without saying in modern chess books that, when I use a term like ‘best move’, it is not my opinion, but the result of engine analysis. For almost all instances where the quality of a move is mentioned, the engine was
Stockfish
.
This is my 13th chess book, so I am trying not to be superstitious and am hoping 13 will turn out to be a lucky number! At my age, I am not sure I will be writing additional books representing a luckier number, so I wanted this book to be instructive, entertaining, and of high quality. I hope the reader agrees!
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Byron Jacobs of Popular Chess for agreeing to publish this book and laying out the general groundwork of how a tip should be expanded. I would also not only like to thank all my Twitter followers, but especially those that took the time to suggest which tips were either the most helpful to them or those they felt would be most helpful to include in the book. I would also like to thank my editors, Byron and Richard Palliser; it requires a good editor to make a chess book more readable and instructive!
Dan Heisman,
May 2025
Chapter One
General Improvement
This chapter covers a variety of areas of personal chess improvement, like which areas to concentrate upon, types of games to play or books to read. Included are some ‘meta-tips’ dealing with how to best use advice or how to learn/deal with chess principles. The ‘General’ heading also serves as an area for tips that do not fall neatly into the topics covered in the other chapters.
Tip 1
When you first begin to play chess and improve, concentrate primarily on just three things: the safety of moves (both yours and your opponent’s), using all your pieces all the time, and good time management: not playing too fast or too slow for the game and allocating more time to critical moves.
Here are two stories to illustrate this suggestion:
The Internet Chess Club has several weakened engines to play against amateur players. One is designed to only look four ply (two moves) ahead; after that it is shut off and completely blind. Within two moves it will play safely; it will not lose material and will win material if it can see the certainty within that window. It otherwise has only rudimentary strategy. What do you think its FIDE/USCF equivalent rating is?
Amazingly, the answer is 1650. That is higher than the average rating of an adult tournament player! This result shows how important the most simple, basic tactics are, not to mention consistency. If you can master the three items in the tip, you can play competitively with most tournament players!
When I first started coaching radio personality Howard Stern, he was little more than a beginner; his early online long time-control rating was about 900 (equivalent to about 750 USCF/FIDE). After six months he was up to 1000. Around that time, we began a lesson and Howard said, “Dan, I think I have gone about as far as I can go. I keep playing those 1100 players and they are just too good for me. I can hardly ever beat them.”
I replied, “Howard, we review your games, and what is happening is that you are making basic tactical mistakes and giving them lots of free material and they are seeing some. Those 1100 players are also making many tactical mistakes, but you are seeing a little bit less and getting less. If you would just stop giving them free material and also win the material they are offering you, you would beat them every game.”
“But Dan,” Howard protested, “That’s easy for you to say. It’s not that easy at my level.”
“Howard, you are correct, of course, but that’s basically what is happening.”
Now fast-forward after four years of additional coaching and Howard’s online rating has risen to 1700+ (about 1550+ USCF/FIDE).
Normally Howard prearranges his online games with friends (they are his regular chess friends, since he played under an online handle and they did not know who he really was). But one day he got on too early – he gets up early for his radio show – and none of his friends were available. So, he did what he did not usually do, hit a button to seek a random opponent. The computer paired him with an 1100 player.
Later that day we had a lesson. I began the lesson as I always do: “Do you have any questions or anything special you would like to do today?”
Howard replied, “Well, I played a game this morning, but it is not worth reviewing. I hit the button and the computer paired me with an 1100 player and he just gave me all his pieces and resigned on move 19.”
Howard’s comment triggered in my mind what he had said four years earlier, so I replied, “You mean one of those same 1100 players that four years ago you told me you would never beat?”
There was silence on the phone for only a short time and then Howard, in good humor as he almost always was during lessons, retorted, “Wise guy!”
Moral of the story: When you are a low-rated player, studying basic tactics, playing carefully every move, and getting rid of your giant tactical mistakes will help you more than memorizing 10 opening books or learning the Lucena and Philidor endgames. Minimizing giant mistakes is far more helpful than learning many strategic nuances. Once you can keep your pieces safe each move and can recognize when your opponent has not and can take advantage of it, then studying lots of opening theory and advanced strategy will become far more useful.
Tip 2
*Top-10 Tip*
The first step in improvement is trying your best on every move, which requires at a minimum good time management (not playing too fast or too slow). You want to look yourself in the mirror after each game and truthfully state “I could not have tried better on any move!”
Suppose you could try your best 95% of the time. Sounds pretty good, right?
Let’s assume the average chess game lasts about 40 moves. 95% of 40 is 38, so that means two moves each game you would *not* try your best. This observation leads to a little thought experiment:
Suppose we have two players, virtual clones. One is rated 1800 and tries his/her best all the time. The other player is identical with that one exception: twice a game he/she suffers a ‘lapse’ and cannot put in the effort that the position and time on the clock would allow, essentially not even trying. What would be the rating of the second player?
I have had several players make estimates for me, and I agree with the consensus answers. These two lapses a game could easily make player no.2 1400-1500 instead of 1800, a loss of 300-400 rating points! That is likely an order of magnitude more rating points than a 1400 could get from memorizing a book on a favorite opening, for sure (even if that were possible).
This experiment shows that consistency in effort and concentration is worth quite a bit. It is no coincidence that if you go to a big tournament the ones who consistently take the most time are the better players.
What might cause lapses from trying your best? There could be many factors, such as:
• Forgetting to do all the things you know you should do, like making sure the opponent does not have a check, capture, or threat (forcing move) which might defeat your candidate move.
• Fatigue or some sort of tiredness due to internal or external conditions, such as not getting enough liquids during the game or not having enough sleep.
• Some sort of distraction, like worrying about what happened earlier in the game, or where you are going to eat dinner.
• The inability to roll up the sleeves and take time to carefully analyze complex positions, whereas following general principles on more simple positions requires less effort.
• Quite a few other reasons are possible, such as getting over-confident or playing with too much fear.
Whatever the cause, these lapses can be disastrous. Learning how to minimize or prevent them can make a big difference in your game. The first step is awareness.
• Many of my students offer a variety of reasons why they did not play their best on every move. For example, they might state: “I thought I was winning easily and it did not matter what I did, so I was just quickly making attacking moves without paying attention to what my opponent was doing.”
• Luckily, I never fell victim to these types of psychological issues. Instead, I always said that I had only two gears when playing: Try your best, given the board and time conditions, or resign.
I tell my new students “You want to be able to look yourself in the mirror after each game and truthfully state “I could not have tried better on any move.”
That does not mean you should play so slowly that you get into unreasonable time pressure. Playing too slowly is not doing your best; quite the opposite. If you play too slowly you are likely giving the game to your opponent, rather than making them win it.
You want to play the best move you can find in a reasonable amount of time
, as noted above, given the board and time conditions. If you can use almost all your time without getting into unnecessary time pressure and properly allocate more time to complicated and critical moves, that is about all you can reasonably be asked to do. Therefore, that is the best measure of whether you are trying your best.
Tip 3
*Top-10 Tip*
The best thing you can do to improve is to consistently analyze with strong players.
Why analyze with strong players? They can:
• Help you determine which moves are strong candidates, which are not, and why.
• Show you when to stop analyzing and chose the move.
• Show you how deep to analyze, and how to avoid quiescence errors.
• Help you evaluate positions better.
• Answer questions you have about analysis and evaluation.
Many students wonder how to access these players. There are a variety of ways:
• Have friends who are strong players who will analyze with you.
• Analyze your games with opponents, especially at over-the-board (OTB) events, where some of your opponents will be stronger.
• Hire a chess coach to analyze games and positions with you during lessons and improve your skills, like analysis, evaluation, and time management (and not just teach you openings and how to play the Lucena endgame).
• Go to a local chess club, make friends with the stronger players, and watch them analyze their games and others (hopefully including yours).
• Join an online analysis/improvement group run by strong players – most are paid, but occasionally some are free.
I was lucky enough to be invited to join the Germantown Chess Club when I was a beginner. Many of the best players from the Philadelphia area went there, and most were willing to analyze their games and others once they finished their weekly slow game.
I would watch them analyze and occasionally throw in (dumb) questions like “Why didn’t you play/consider that move?” and they would answer “Because of so-and-so”, such as “In this type of position I am trying to do X and Y, and that move doesn’t help me get toward that goal”, or “I looked at that briefly, but what do I do if he replies Z, and then I don’t have any good answers,” or “That would be a good idea if such-and-such were true, but in this case it’s not, so it doesn’t do as much.”
I remember one time I was analyzing a position from an early middlegame with a strong player, likely Don Latzel, and I had pawns next to each other on the same rank, something like (I will show only the two pawns, but most of the pieces were still on the board; these were not passed pawns):
White to play
In this position I played 1.f4-f5 and after the game Don said to me “Why did you play that move?” and I replied “Because both pawns are undefended and after 1.f4-f5 one of them is guarded.”
Don then told me something I never forgot (but it has been so long that I am paraphrasing):
“OK, Dan, I understand, but in your position neither of the pawns was in danger. By spending a tempo to play 1.f4-f5, you fix your pawns on light squares, which weakens the dark squares around them. So later your opponent can safely place pieces on f6 or g5 to blockade the pawns, which also, in the long run, might make your pawns more vulnerable. On the other hand, if you can safely leave them on g4 and f4, you are controlling all the fifth rank squares in front of the pawns, so that no opposing pieces can sit on those squares. Therefore, you might want to push one of those pawns only if you can get an attack or you need to do it to keep them safe.”
Good advice! It is also similar to the reason why, if you study a positional text on hanging pawns (which are also abreast like this on semi-open files with no adjacent supporting pawns; mine were not on semi-open files), it will usually advise you something like “When your opponent has hanging pawns, try to attack them to entice one of them to move forward, when you can blockade them and make them more vulnerable.”
Of course, I am a full-time chess coach and this is the kind of instruction we like to supply, but my point was that Don was not a coach; he was just a friendly stronger player who was willing to help a young player understand the game better.
These days when I go to our local chess club, I try to ‘pay it forward’ by doing the same things for the improving players (of all ages) at our club. Although I do not play much anymore, I wait until games are finished and offer to review them with the players. It is very much giving them free ‘’mini-lessons’ like the ones I was so lucky to have received many years ago.
It is for reasons like this that I encourage players to join a local club. Sure, the internet is great and you can get a game 24/7, but if there is a convenient club within a reasonable distance, the benefits to going there and meeting players ‘in person’ is often quite helpful, both socially and for your chess improvement.
Tip 4
Do not ‘lock yourself in a closet’ waiting to get good enough to compete. Get out to clubs and tournaments, and start playing and learning.
As a full-time instructor for many years, I occasionally run into the mentality of a student who feels they are “not good enough” to go to clubs and tournaments. They want to first take lessons until they are strong enough.
I sometimes compare this to an aspiring golfer who takes golf lessons and goes to the driving range, but doesn’t want to yet play golf on a golf course. Such a player may develop a good, or at least adequate, golf swing, but they would not be developing any of their course management skills like how to handle the wind, when to play safe, or dealing with competitive pressures from opponents or other situations.
In a similar manner, playing in chess club and tournaments requires learning how to deal with any number of situations that don’t come up from just studying openings or tactics.
I like to tell the following story to illustrate one aspect: I had an adult student who mostly played online and was eager to improve. At my suggestion, he decided to play in his first over-the-board tournament and in his first game was paired with the young son of the tournament director. After they had played a few moves – enough to take my student out of his opening book – his young opponent got up and started to run out of the room, apparently to use the restroom.
His father, the tournament director (TD), naturally intercepted his son on the way out to talk to him. As a TD and father myself, his interception was undoubtedly to ask his son if anything was wrong. But my student immediately suspected the worst, that the TD possibly was trying to illegally help his opponent! However, he felt there was nothing he could do – the person he should ask for help in such a situation was that very same TD. Therefore, by the time his opponent returned from the restroom, my student was a nervous wreck and could not concentrate. He said he soon put his queen en prise and resigned. So far as I know, he never played another tournament.
Obviously, my student greatly overreacted to an otherwise fairly innocuous situation. But it does illustrate the point that there are many situations in a real event which just ‘locking yourself in a closet’ and studying does not prepare you for.
I suggest to nervous students that there are two types of nervousness:
• The nerves from competition – This is natural, somewhat fight or flight adrenaline, and it never fully goes away. It does diminish somewhat for most players when they compete regularly.
• The “newness” nerves – This happens when doing something for the initial time(s) whether it is attending a new school or job, a first date, or first visit to a club or first tournament(s). This is often a greater nervousness, but the good news is it not only fades, but often disappears entirely once you have enough experience. Therefore, if you play in tournaments often enough (let’s say at least four per year), then eventually playing in those events becomes ‘old hat’ and the newness nervousness dissipates.
In tip #70 we will address the fear of losing, which creates a different reason why some lock themselves in the closet – they fear losing so badly that they only want to play once they are strong enough to lose less often. This fear not only prevents them from losing and learning, but it also is misplaced, because the two practices of sectioning events into levels of playing strength plus the Swiss system both tend to push players of all levels score towards 50%. In other words, players rated around 1200 mostly play opponents near their level, and so do players rated around 1700 (or pretty much pick a level) play opponents near their level.
Ironically, what this means is that if you are 1000 strength and try to wait until you are 1500 to play, you will only win slightly more often! This logic breaks down if you are extremely good or bad, or play in completely open sections, but the bottom line is that ‘waiting until you are good’ rarely accomplishes very much, except delay getting valuable experience.
While it is true that on the average, you learn more from your losses than your wins, there is usually much to be learned from your wins as well. I tell my students you can learn from 100% of your losses, but maybe only 99% of your wins – the exceptions being if your opponent falls into an opening trap (or blunders right away badly) and resigns. Otherwise, your wins are probably full of meaningful learning situations as well. In any case, play and learn!
An important final note: locking yourself in the closet to study is inefficient. I suggest something called the improvement feedback loop, a learning ‘triangle’ where you play-study-get feedback. While you can study at home efficiently, playing requires at least an opponent, but, moreover,
good feedback is much more than just having an engine analyze your game.
Feedback from opponents, strong players, databases, and other sources is a key to efficient improvement.
Tip 5
If your goal is to be good against humans, there is some benefit playing low-rated engines, but much more benefit playing humans. Humans play much differently than engines: psychology, time management, style, etc, so playing humans is better practice.
By teaching so many students one to one privately, I get a pretty good representation of what players aspiring to improve are doing (right and wrong; strengths and weaknesses). One of the common issues some students have, especially those that play primarily online, is that they do not want to play against humans.
A few who do not play against humans do so mostly because engine opponents are much more convenient; they will play any time 24/7, at any time control, with any color and, for the most part, at any level of desired opponent strength. Those are certainly excellent reasons to play computer opponents, and it is beneficial to play engines if the choice is to do so or not play at all.
But when I ask students what their goal is for lessons, almost everyone – naturally – says they want to improve their chess game. But if my follow-up questions is “Against whom do you want to play better?”, the overwhelming majority indicate some type of human opponents: tournaments, clubs, friends, online players. Only a minority state that they play engines and just want to do better against engines.
So as an instructor, I now have two crucial pieces of information: my student wants to be a better player, and most want to play better against humans.
If playing engines
will
help their game, shouldn’t that be a recommendation? They answer is a qualified yes, because it would be much more helpful to play against humans. As noted in the tip, playing humans has major advantages if your final goal is to play against them:
• Psychology – Most humans opponents are friendly and there are no psychological issues in playing them. Unfortunately, not everyone (especially on the internet where some hide behind their anonymous presence) is a friendly foe and no one can become a strong player without learning how to deal with opponents of all types, including the annoying ones.
• Time management – Most (but not all) weakened engines play immediately, since a good engine can play very well if only given a few milliseconds. So, to minimize waiting and total game time, engines are programmed to play quickly no matter what the circumstances. But humans not only play much more slowly, they play at different speeds depending on the criticality of the position and some have poor time management, playing much too fast or too slow. Therefore, when playing against humans, you have time to think or do other things during the opponent’s move (Tip #48), and learn how to deal with opponents who play too quickly or too slowly (Tip #84).
• Style – Engines that are programmed to play weakly don’t play in the same style nor make the same type of mistakes that humans at that same rating do. As just mentioned, a human could have a much weaker rating than their overall strength if they play too slowly and consistently give games away. An engine playing at the same strength would undoubtedly play weaker moves, but time trouble would never be an issue. There are a variety of ways to make an engine play weakly; some I have seen include only allowing the engine to look so far ahead (four ply was one example), or having the engine not develop pieces for the first 10 moves before playing more strongly, etc. None of these artificial weakening methods resulted in that engine playing like a human of identical strength. I am sure some do much better than others, but an ‘debilitated’ engine’s consistent weakening tendencies generally are different than an amateur human’s natural inconsistent thought process and analytical issues.
Therefore, if someone has access to human opponents, as they very conveniently almost always do through tournaments, clubs, and most of all online servers, then it makes sense to select a human opponent for ‘most optimum’ improvement aspects toward their goal.
Tip 6
Just because the leading servers do not have many ‘buttons’ to find slower games with increments, it is still an excellent idea to play slow games, online or otherwise, with an increment (or time delay).
When sudden death (all moves in a specified amount of time) games are played without an increment or time delay, it is very possible to reach a position where neither side can checkmate before one or both players runs out of time. This is called a ‘race’ condition because in those circumstances, the quality of the moves no longer matters; often just who moves fastest wins.
Understandably, the Rules Committee wants to avoid those situations in serious games. When I attended the US Chess Federation Rules Committee meeting that was one of the subjects and they wanted to do everything possible to ‘encourage’ organizers, tournament directors, and players to always augment slow sudden death time controls with increments or time delays.
This brings us to the curious modern-day situation where the leading online servers, who have many times more members than over-the-board federations, for the most part do not offer ‘automatic’ buttons to request slow games with increments. I worked for Chess.com (my TV show was “Q&A with Coach Heisman”) and had several conversations about how to make it easier for those who want to play serious slow games find others of like mind.
Although, or maybe because, those conversations were ultimately fruitless, I have had complaints from around 500 students (or chess friends) that they cannot find anyone online who will play slow games with them – or at least have difficulty doing so. Since I know or chat with an extremely small percentage of the players on the planet who play online, the actual number who are eager or would be willing to play slow games with an increment must be enormously higher.
There is some good news – pretty much all the servers have a ‘custom’ time control capability where a user can set up almost any time control and then offer it on some sort of map to prospective random opponents who can select their game. But slow games, although popular, are not nearly as popular, nor get the turnover, of speed games, so those creating the slow games offers may wait an inordinate amount of time to get someone to look for and choose their game. They often give up before that happens. On the other hand, if they hit a ‘30 0’ button and get a 30-minute game with no increment, they are paired with the first reasonably rated opponent who also hits that button. Therefore, it is much easier to get a game through a button, but alas, there currently is no button with a slow game and an increment.
The other good news is that several servers have slow leagues or events that offer time limits of 45 45 (i.e. 45 minutes for the game with a 45-second delay or increment per move), 60 30, or even 90 30. There the players are almost always paired and they negotiate a time to play, when they can set a custom time control at the appropriate speed and challenge their known opponent.
Unfortunately, sometimes these leagues are not prominently advertised by the servers. Since the server gets most of the clientele through faster time controls, a prospective slow player either must do a search or have been told by a friend or colleague that such a league or event exists so that they can join and find the slow, serious games they desire.
On my website danheisman.com I do have an alternative suggestion for those that want to find slow time controls with increments, but feel like they are relegated to hitting 30 0 buttons if they want to find a game within a reasonable amount of time. My method is based on the ‘networking’ method of job hunting and, in practice, it has worked very well for those willing to invest a little time up front to get it up and running. Here are the steps:
Make daily generic posts for obtaining friends to play slow games at clubs that feature slow play, such as:
• Clubs on Chess.com, like the Dan Heisman Learning Center, Slow-Chess-League, nm-coach bills-free video-lessons, or G30.
• On LiChess join the Hemmingford Chess Club.
• Someone told me: “@chess_dojo on Discord is fast and organized for players looking for slow play and postmortems.”
• There may be other good places, such as the chess forums on Reddit.
A post can read something like:
“Hi! I am looking for members who would like to play long time control games with me. I am looking for players in the rating range xxxx-yyyy. If you are interested, please message me and I will get back to you as soon as possible. Thanks!”
Change or modify this message to meet your needs. For example, if you live in Europe, you might want to say so if that affects what time zones allow you to play at a reasonable hour.
Post often enough that many can see your posts (do not just post once and give up if no one sends you a message). Check your messages on your server frequently so that you can respond in a timely manner. Once you have enough friends to play games any time you wish, you can stop posting. Also, check others’ posts to see if they are looking for slow games and respond with a message – they may have even gotten that idea here!
When you do find players who will play you slowly, it is important to ask them “Do you have a list of friends around our rating who also might play me some slow games?” If so, add that list to your friends’ list and it will grow quickly!
When you and your friend meet, you can go to the server and challenge your friend, setting the custom time control at the agreed time. If you are looking for a game on short notice and had not scheduled a game earlier, contact your list of friends (text message, email, etc), and see who is available.
It may take a few weeks or even a few months before you have enough online friends to make this work for games at any time you wish, but, once you have, you are set for life.
Final note: this method worked well for radio personality Howard Stern, a long-time student. Of course, Howard plays anonymously on the internet, so he was not able to attract a large set of friends just due to reputation; he had to do it one friend at a time, but it worked. If it worked for the anonymous Howard, it can work for you!
Tip 7
Learn by playing ‘What if?’ games with a strong engine.
Many online players find their game automatically reviewed by the chess server’s engines. These annotations are great for figuring out the opening book recommendations, which wins were missed, or what was the losing move. However, these brief annotations are not a great substitute for how much a player can learn when reviewing games (their games and others as well) and playing “What if?” games – or just position play-outs – with the engine.
During any chess study, whether it is reviewing your own games, looking at others’ games, doing puzzles, or learning openings, you naturally will arrive at positions that either did not occur in the game, were not part of the puzzle solution, not covered in the opening material, etc. Sometimes these alternatives lines, especially if reasonable, are covered in the side notes by the author. But especially if you are a weaker player (and often for stronger, too), there may be moves where you think ‘But what about this move?’
Another situation covered by this tip would be ‘How would I (or anyone) win or draw this position if X were played?’ This issue is especially common in the endgame. Students often tell me something like “Yes, the engine says this endgame is winning, but I am too weak to win it.”
Unless this is a late endgame ‘exact’ position with a known solution, you likely will not find the technique to win that position in an endgame manual. But you also do not get better by osmosis; if you do not have a strong player available to help (a common situation!), then playing out the endgame with an engine will provide valuable experience. You can play the side trying to win or draw, let the engine play that side and you defend, or even let the engine play both sides.
When running an engine, you can usually set the number of variations (‘best moves’) you want to view. The number one variation, starting with the player to move’s best move, is called the #principal variation’ (PV). If you show three variations, it will look something like:
Here’s how to read this output: The name of the engine,
Stockfish 15
, is the header. The “1:” on the next line means that what follows is the PV, the suggested best moves for both sides. The “(7.38)” in parentheses is the engine’s evaluation of the position for the PV; if it is positive, it means White is better; negative indicates Black is better. Here White is ahead by 7.38 pawns. The “[29]” is the number of ply that the engine is looking ahead (it may also be doing an expanded search beyond that number of base ply, depending upon the engine). The rest of the line is the best moves for both sides, starting with White’s best 32nd move. On the next line “2:” indicates the line that follows will start with White’s second best move, followed by the best moves thereafter for both sides.
When playing ‘What if?’ games, it is often a good idea to show at least the best two variations. That way, if the evaluation between the best move and the second best move is sufficiently great (especially when the value of the best evaluation is in the competitive -1 to +1 range), the engine is telling you that the no.1 move is clearly best or even forced.
This is where the fun begins, because if you don’t know why the second best move is weaker or why the best move is better (which is almost the same!), you can force the engine down one or both the lines to see what is happening on the board in the various continuations. Often this will clarify why the evaluations differed so much, but other times may still be unclear so, if you are really curious, you can mark that position as a discussion point for your next lesson or chat with the strong chess friend.
If you are replaying one of your games and the evaluation of the PV drops dramatically, that means the move just played was a big mistake (by the way, the evaluation cannot go
up
dramatically; Zermelo proved in 1913 that your position cannot get ‘better’ when you make a good move, but that’s a different issue; see danheisman.com/steinitz-zermelo-elkies.html).
Whenever the evaluation drops that much, you want to know why; sometimes the variation is so complex that no human could find it and you will not learn much, but often it’s a common tactical error that you should learn to recognize and analyze better (assuming it was either your mistake or an opponent’s for which you did not take proper advantage).
If the engine is playing out the rest of the game for both sides, try to discern any strategic patterns that can be applied to future similar situations. Perhaps it is activating a pawn majority or piling up on a weakness, or cleverly using its king in the endgame.
Modern engines give us tools we did not have when I was improving. Playing ‘what if’ games with engines augments your learning and likely speeds up your development.
Tip 8
When considering an equal move versus an unclear move, unless you are in an important event where a draw is very beneficial (e.g. needing a draw to win $10,000 at the World Open), it is likely better to play the move that is unclear so that you can learn something. In doing so, next time a similar situation occurs you are less likely to feel it is unclear.
Some situations are always going to remain unclear, but there are positions where sacrifices are often available, such as the Classical Bishop Sacrifice (‘Greek Gift’) or where you can sacrifice a piece for a pawn, but expose the opponent’s king.
When you first start playing chess, these common patterns will seem a mystery, but as you see them in annotated games or try them in your own games, the resulting positions that at first seem completely unclear sometimes slowly resolve themselves into ‘good-looking’ or ‘poor-looking’ possibilities.
Therefore, it is good to try things that require a little risk. If you see a speculative sacrifice and to you it is not clearly good or bad, if the alternative is a dull game with roughly equal chances, and the situation is a good learning one (no big money or titles at stake), take a chance and try it. Here is an example:
Kubacki – Heisman
LaSalle Invitational 1967
White to play after 15...
Q
xd3
This game was played in my first year of tournament play and I believe my opponent was the highest-rated high school player in the state (Kubacki was 1900; I was rated just 1467).
In this game Michael, White, seemed to be influenced by Misha Tal, the former world champion who loved what seemed to most to be unclear sacrifices. Michael unleashed:
16.Rxe6+?! fxe6
I have to accept or I am exposed with little to show for it.
17.Qxe6+ Be7?
Much better is 17...Ne7, and if 18.Qxf6 Rf8 regains the piece through the skewer to f3.
18.Ne5! Nxe5! 19.Qxe5?
Better is 19.Bxb7 with equal chances.
19...Bxg2! 20.Re1
If 20.Qxh8+ Kd7 and Black is just winning.
Black to play after 20.
R
e1
I thought for a long while here and, among other candidates, considered the desperate 20...Be4?, but then I realized I had a perfectly good answer. I played:
20...0-0-0!
Amazingly, this is a very rare position where the only two winning moves are 20...0-0-0 and 20...0-0! I won easily after:
21.Qxe7 Qxd2 22.Qxc5+ Kb8 23.Re7 Qd1+! 24.Kxg2 Qd5+ 0-1
When they asked Misha Tal, famous for sacrifices, if he always worked them out to the end before making them, he said he did not. He did what most of us do – he got to a certain point and said to himself ‘That looks good, let’s go for it!”
Here is some special advice to the many who analyze superficially: The common beginner mistake to sacrifice a piece just to get a pawn and two checks is not worth it – you need a continuing attack!
A final warning:
taking the unclear path only makes sense if the alternative is equal or worse
. Unless it is a really meaningless game, I strongly advise against going into an unclear line if the alternative is playing ‘clearly’ and having a very good if not winning position!
Tip 9
The three types of chess “’visions’ are visualization, tactical vision, and board vision. Develop all of them!
Let’s define what I mean by each:
Visualization: The ability to keep track of where the pieces would have moved during lines of analysis. Humans use their imagination to visualize.
Tactical vision: The ability to spot basic safety issues (motifs like pins, double attacks, removal of the guard, and Counting) when starting to analyze a position.
Board vision: The ability to look at a chess board and quickly see what all the pieces are doing (statically). For example, seeing that a bishop on a1 is attacking h8. This name is not standard throughout the industry; for example, in his book
Rapid Chess Improvement
Michael de la Maza calls this “chess vision”.
Visualization is a root skill in analysis. If you can’t keep track of where the pieces are in your imagination of possible move sequences, you can’t analyze or evaluate them properly. There are many theories on how to develop better visualization, but one is surely practice! Play hundreds if not thousands of long time control games and every time you analyze, try to carefully move the pieces around in your imagination, keeping track of where they go. Practice may not make perfect, but it should make you a lot better! See Tip #11 for more about visualization.
Your tactical vision helps determine the areas where you will analyze potential tactics and determine the safety of both sides’ pieces. Your tactical vision is the one that recognizes both the Seeds of Tactical Destruction (Tip #100) that tell you where potential tactics might occur, and then which tactical motifs (double attack, pin, back-rank mate, removal of the guard) might be attempted in analysis to execute the tactic and win material or checkmate.
What are some examples of board vision?
• Counting the material balance.
• Judging relative space.
• Judging piece activity.
• Judging central control.
• Recognizing weak squares, weak/strong pawns, and potential outposts.
• Judging piece coordination.
• Seeing the pawn structure, open and semi-open files, etc.
• Seeing if anyone possesses the bishop-pair.
• Judging relative king safety.
What board vision does not include would be possible tactically opportunities (tactical vision) or what the pieces can do if they move (visualization).
In his interesting book
Genius in Chess
, IM Levitt discusses this skill at length, but interestingly does not give it a separate name from visualization. Levitt devised a series of board vision puzzles and gave them to international players of various strengths. Even though board vision may not involve ‘goodness’ of moves – it may only require something like counting the number of legal moves in a position – Levitt came up with an interesting conclusion: even at the international level, there is still a correlation between rating and board vision skill.
I have found that this correlation extends to the lower levels as well. This brings up the ‘chicken and the egg’ question: Does better board vision make you a better player, or do you simply have better board vision because you are a better player? I suspect most of the cause and effect is in the former: developing your board vision helps make you a better player.
Let’s provide an example of Levitt’s board vision exercises. He created a scoring system that the faster you answer and the more accurate, the higher your score (time counts). In the following position, as quickly as you can, provide two numbers: 1) the number of legal moves White has, and 2) the number of those moves that are checkmate:
How many legal white moves? How many are mate?
The correct answers are 29 and 29. Only four pieces can move: queen (4 moves), rook on d2 (10), knight on e3 (8), and bishop b3 (7). Even though the knight on c6 is absolutely pinned to the king, 1.Qb4# is mate because chess rules allow an absolutely pinned piece to still guard another piece against a king capture (think of the rule as being designed to not allow 1...Kxb4 because 2.Nxb4 would capture the black king before the white king could be captured).
How does one improve board vision? In most ways that you do chess work: play long time control games slowly and view the board, do many chess puzzles, play over many annotated games, analyze with other players, watch chess videos, follow online grandmaster games, and do non-traditional puzzles aimed at specifically developing different types of skills.
In the next tip #10 we give some examples of how non-traditional puzzles may be a good way to improve both your board vision and the other visions as well.
Tip 10
You can improve your board vision by working on “non-traditional” puzzles that require goals different than win/mate/draw.
Just as a football player can improve his skills by going to the weight room and lifting weights even though there are no barbells on a football field during a game, a chess player can exercise his brain and chess logic by doing exercises and puzzles that require him to do things with pieces that do not normally occur in actual games.
Most non-traditional puzzles help you improve your board vision (Tip #9) and, depending on their type, possibly the other visions as well. For example, in his books
Chess Puzzles for Kids Vol I and II
, Jeff Coakley uses several types, including:
•
Double Whammy
(I believe these are also ‘Series mates in 2’) – White gets two moves in a row to checkmate Black who, unlike in traditional mate-in-two problems, doesn’t get a move. In double whammies, the first move cannot be check. (When a student objects that this cannot occur in a game, I change it to “Find a move that’s not check that threatens mate-in-one”, which is the same as the Double Whammy’s first move!)
•
Switcheroo
– Switch
any
two pieces on the board with each other to deliver a legal checkmate (one that could occur in a game) to the black king, The only switching restriction is that pawns cannot be switched with pieces on the first or eighth ranks.
Let’s give an example of each from Coakley’s books:
Double Whammy – White makes 2 moves in a row to mate Black
Several of my students start by suggesting the answer is 1.Na3 and then 2.Bf3#, which would be great if the bishop were not pinned by the knight move!
Solution:
1.Qa1
and
2.
Q
h1#
– A fantastic board vision problem as the queen has to travel ‘long distance’ to go from Black’s kingside to White’s queenside to White’s kingside to mate a king on Black’s queenside.
Next is a switcheroo: switch
any
two pieces on the board to leave Black’s king in a legal checkmate; pawns may not be switched to the first or eighth rank.
Switcheroo
Solution: Switch the white queen with the b3-pawn. There are many other switches that lead to mate, but none of them could legally occur in a game. For example, switching the white queen with the f7-pawn is mate, but that type of double check with the queen and rook on g6 is not possible in a game. Or switching the knight on c3 with the bishop on e7 would checkmate the black king, but that’s also not a legal position because both kings would be in check.
In my experience, most strong players find these types of non-traditional problems fun. I think they help improve your chess logic, board vision, tactical vision, and just your understanding of what pieces can do when coordinating together.
Tip 11
When you are visualizing, only a few pieces have moved (at five ply only five maximum, plus captures or castling). So you don’t need to ‘see’ the entire board, just be aware of which pieces have moved where and the rest are still as seen in the position in front of you.
Sometimes I run into the misconception that in order to visualize a possible move sequence, one needs to be able to visualize the entire position that could occur, comparable to what you would do if you were playing blindfold.
While the ability to visualize an entire board is helpful and those who can do it are at an advantage, for beginners and players trying to improve remedial visualization, it is a good idea to understand that such a feat is not necessary.
When you visualize one ply (a ‘ply’ is a half move; when a game begins 1.e4 e5 that is one move but two ply) ahead, then usually only one piece has moved from the position you see in front of you. There are some exceptions, like captures (which move one piece and remove another at the same time) and castling, which ‘displaces’ two pieces. So, in order to visualize the board, you only need to keep track of which pieces moved; the rest of the pieces, if uncaptured, are still exactly where you see them in front of you.
Admittedly, this is easier said than done, but understanding this simplifies the goal of being able to visualize what happens if a certain sequence were played.
Let’s take a position from my book
Back to Basics: Tactics
as an example (which you can also try to solve if you wish):
Black to play and win material
First I will give the answer and then we will do step-by step visualization:
1...Rxe4 2.Qxe4
(2.dxe4 Qxd1+ 3.Qxd1 Rxd1 wins a knight)
2...Qxe4 3.dxe4 Rxd1+
. Black’s first move is an example of a “sneaky pin” (Tip #105), since the white d-pawn is not easily guarding e4 due to the resultant pin on the rook on d1 by the black queen and rook on d8. Let’s visualize the main line:
1...Rxe4
– The rook that was on e5 is now on e4 and the knight that was on e4 is now off the board (permanently, so don’t bring it back in your imagination!). Everything else on the original position you see in front of you is the same, such as the white king on b1 and black king on g7, etc.
2.Qxe4
– The queen that was on e2 is now on e4 and the rook that originally was on e5 and captured on e4 is off the board. We now have the position we started with, but the white queen is on e4, and the knight and black rook on e5 have disappeared. Again, everything else is the same.
2...Qxe4
– The queen that was on d4 is now on e4 and the white queen, the white knight, and the black rook that was on e5 are all gone.
3.dxe4
– The pawn that was on d3 is now on e4 and both queens, the white knight, and the black rook that was on e5 are all gone.
3...Rxd1+
– But now the black rook that was on d8 is now on d1 and the white rook that was on d1 is gone. As previously, the pawn that was on d3 is now on e4 and both queens, the white knight, and the black rook that was on e5 are all gone. What final position should we visualize/imagine?
The final position
Tip 12
Augment your slow chess skills by playing speed chess/blitz. Speed chess is an excellent way to practice/learn openings, increase your tactical vision and board vision, and improve time management.
My students who don’t play speed chess, or not much of it, tend to suffer from the following problems:
• They don’t know their openings very well, or at least as well as they could. It takes a lot of practice with an opening and speed games provide roughly the same amount of experience per unit game as slow games (assuming you look up your openings after each series of games; Tip #134).
• They tend to panic when short on time even when they have plenty of time to make reasonable moves, because they are not used to playing with relatively less time on their clock.
• It generally takes them longer to develop quick tactical vision (helpful in slow chess too), since they don’t have to consistently find safe moves or winning tactics in a short time, as is required in speed chess.
I don’t usually suggest regular speed chess play until a player is around 1100 USCF/FIDE. Playing below that level is often frustrating because players don’t have the board vision to consistently make basic safe moves. But once you are strong enough to play speed games and have fun, it is a great way to develop the skills and knowledge listed above.
Having said that, there is a related issue (Tip Alert!):
If you want to be good at speed chess, first become really strong at slow chess.
I sometimes get students who exclusively play speed chess, but want to become a really good player overall. You certainly can get much better at chess by playing exclusively speed chess, but in doing so there is a limit to picking up many of the slow chess skills like visualization, chess logic, endgame experience, and others that are not developed as well in speed games.
Did you ever notice in World Blitz/Rapid events that although some grandmasters are much better at speed chess than others, there are no speed chess ‘savants’ who are rated c.2000 in slow chess but c.2800 in speed chess and can compete with Nakamura and Carlsen. How did all those world-class speed players get so proficient at speed play? By playing a ton of slow chess and developing excellent slow skills, which in turn allow one to play very well when given much less time to think. The best speed players are generally the best slow players.
Tip 13
Knowledge may only be about one third of chess ability. The rest are skills/traits like analysis, evaluation, time management, visualization, stamina, deductive logic, determination, perseverance, consistency, the ability to learn from mistakes, the ability to take instruction, and other skills.
The five main parts of chess knowledge are:
• Opening patterns and sequences.
• Endgame patterns and sequences.
• Positional patterns like weak pawns and squares, pawn majorities, etc.
• Tactical patterns and sequences.
• Principles (like the ones in many of these tips!).
This sounds like quite a bit, and it is. However, my belief is that the skills and traits mentioned in the tip, along with all the other applicable skills and traits, may make up even more, possibly something like two-thirds of chess ability.
What other skills and traits were not listed in the tip? You can probably name a few I omitted, such as ability to take instruction, concentration, consistency, ability to not let mistakes affect your play, and a favorite of many, ‘willpower’.
In talking with many aspiring players, quite a few have the paradigm that getting better at chess simply involves gathering more and more knowledge. But unless you are in your opening ‘book’ or in a deep exact endgame, you are probably in a position where you don’t know what to do, and must rely on your analytical and evaluation skills to pick the best move you can in a reasonable amount of time.
Without question, your knowledge of tactical and positional patterns, along with the proper allocation of principles, all play a big part in your analysis and evaluation. But in most ‘non-book’ positions, this knowledge must augment, not replace your ability to calculate and select moves.
In some very quiet, but unfamiliar positions it may be possible to select a move entirely on experience and principles. But to do so in tactical or complex positions that require careful analysis, I call the ‘hand-waving’ error. This thought process error is common in many low-rated players that either don’t realize what careful analysis requires or play mostly fast time controls which don’t allow them to develop careful analytical skills.
Developing skills is more difficult than simply acquiring knowledge. Some skills and traits are more innate. For example, some are born with incredible willpower, perseverance, or concentration, while other skills are easier to develop – one can improve stamina through physical workouts or time management through good coaching and awareness.
Tip 14
Hire a coach who will help you develop skills, and not just feed you knowledge.
Like anything else, there are good coaches and bad coaches. To make it more complicated, interaction between coach and student is personal, so someone who can be a great coach for one student may not be so good for another.
However, there is one precaution that I want to present: in general, good coaches not only provide knowledge, but also help the student develop skills. As noted in the previous tip, I believe chess is about two-thirds skills and one-third knowledge, and the one thing that most correlates with your overall chess playing strength is your analytical ability, a skill. Some coaches, however, primarily instruct by disseminating knowledge: they teach students opening sequences, ‘exact’ endgames like the Philidor and Lucena rook and pawn endgames, and even position-specific patterns like how to get a pawn majority rolling or conduct a typical kingside attack.
Don’t get me wrong – this knowledge they are teaching is valuable and even necessary information toward becoming a good player. The problem is if that is all that’s being taught, the important chess skills of analysis, evaluation, time management, how to study, how to tolerate and learn from losses, visualization, and so on, will not necessarily be addressed.
I once was discussing this on Twitter when someone tweeted at me (I paraphrase):
“Dan, I have gotten to 1500 primarily by enhancing my chess knowledge: I have learned more openings, endgames, tactical patterns, and principles. But I have no idea how to analyze an unfamiliar position and you have made me realize that if I want to continue development and play with much stronger opponents, I need to develop my analytical skills.”
Well said. When I was a developing player, I found that I could beat far more knowledgeable, older players just by ‘hanging around’ until the position got critical or complicated, and then using superior analytical skills to outplay them in those critical moments. Many players who just increase their knowledge and don’t work on increasing their skills can get ‘stuck’ faster than those with increasing skills.
As a chess coach who specializes in skills like thought process and time management, I often run into prospective students who have had prior coaches who only instruct by providing chess knowledge. This is understandable because there is not as much money in big-time chess as there is in other sports, so many strong players cannot make a living just with prize winnings, and need to augment their income with coaching. But some strong players, as in all sports, are not natural teachers, so providing their excellent chess knowledge is their main method of coaching. This also makes sense in that the main skills involved in being a strong player, like those under discussion, are quite different than some of the main skills in being a good teacher: communication, empathy, patience, listening, and understanding.
Students are sometimes surprised when I tell them that although I can teach them openings and ‘exact’ endgames too (although a strong player who knows the Grünfeld can probably teach it a lot better than I can!), my forte is trying to help students learn how to think correctly and consistently, manage their time better, understand and mitigate their mistakes and weaknesses, and learn how to evaluate more accurately. There are many excellent coaches out there who also impart these skills and traits to their students, as well as possessing that ‘strong player’ knowledge that is also so important.
So next time you interview a potential coach, listen carefully to his pitch to see what he is offering with regards to improving your skills. If you only hear something about increasing your knowledge (openings, endgames, tactical and positional patterns), you might want to think twice about your long-term prospects.
Tip 15
Chess knowledge is extremely important. But the corollary is that unnecessarily reinventing the wheel, especially in openings, is very inefficient.
Among my new, lower-rated students, about 99% admitted that after each game they did not religiously look up their openings in a book, database, engine, or video. Instead, they tended to either just do it sporadically or ‘guess’ through trial and error what might be a better move next time.
But when I was a beginner and exposed to books like Horowitz’s
Chess Openings Theory and Practice
or Evans and Korn’s
Modern Chess Openings 10
(
MCO
), I found it impossible not to look up my openings after each game. No one told me to do this; it would have been excruciatingly painful to keep making the same mistakes over and over when I could just consult a book and see what the grandmasters recommend in the opening positions I reached! Even when I played speed games, which was often, I tried to remember as many openings as possible after each session so I could look them up, too (this was around 30 years before online play was possible; for online play the chess server will save all your games, fast or slow, in a database, often with comments from an opening book or engine).
In the Netflix show
The Queen’s Gambit
, Beth Harmon learned openings in the early 1960s by perusing
MCO-9
and visualizing on the ceiling while she was getting ready to sleep. I am only a little younger than the fictitious Beth, so young Dan was doing the same thing with
MCO-10
in the late 60s, except I did not use the ceiling; I had a handy-dandy pocket chess set!
*Tip Alert!* After each game, ask the question ‘If I had to play this game again and my opponent made all the same moves, on what move would I improve by playing a different move?’ If you won when your opponent fell into a book trap and resigned, the answer may be ‘none!’, but that is rarely the case. In almost all games there comes an opening move where you could have improved on your play.
You can find the answer in a book on that opening, an opening database, or maybe a video about that opening. But in any case, if those fail for any reason, you can give the position to a strong engine to see its preference. If the move you played is evaluated as more than about 0.1 pawns worse than the engine’s move, there is a good chance that next time you can do better with the suggested move.
I tell the following story to illustrate this point:
I once had a new student, rated in the low 1000s, who said he had hundreds of chess books, but he had been playing for about 20 years and had not improved much. One of the things I do to evaluate students is to review a few recent slow games with them, preferably games they played against a human, and even better if the game is time-stamped so I can judge their time management. This student showed me a game where he was Black and he played the dubious Marshall Defense
1.d4 d5 2.c4 Nf6?!
, a common opening inaccuracy among club players:
White to play after 2...
N
f6?!
Black gets an inferior position after
3.cxd5 Nxd5
(3...Qxd5 4.Nc3 is also an effective ‘Attack with Something Worth Less’ AWL threat)
4.Nf3
. More accurate than the commonly played 4.e4 when the AWL threat of 5.e4 gives White a very large, almost theoretically winning, position.
When I saw my student made this move, I remarked something like “You shouldn’t do that; it’s not much of an opening. If White plays correctly you get a bad game.”
My student was surprised and a little taken aback. He replied, “What do you mean? I have been playing this defense for 20 years!”
So I questioned, “That may be so, but did you ever look up this opening in any of those books that you have?”
There was a brief silence when he finally admitted, “No.” Then I revealed, “If you did, you might have trouble finding it because it’s not a regular opening; more likely a footnote that suggests you shouldn’t do it.”
I just spent five minutes trying to find this line in
MCO-15
and could not, even when I looked under irregular defenses to 1.d4. Therefore, if my student had always followed this tip, he would have saved himself 20 years of playing an inferior defense to 1.d4 and 2.c4!
Tip 16
Play and study things that help you learn, not necessarily ideas that maximize short-term results.
I often hear a new student, let us assume rated in the 1000-1400 range, tell me “My previous instructor felt that I am better at positional play than I am in complications, so he felt I should play the Caro-Kann versus 1.e4”.
To most, this suggested approach seems logical since the instructor seems to be playing toward the student’s strengths. And indeed, if this student was about to play in the World Open U1400 section with the aspiration to win money, this ‘maximize your strengths and hide your weaknesses’ would likely be the best approach. Or if the student was at his lifetime peak rating of 2300+ and was playing in a FIDE event to try to obtain an International Master norm, again taking maximum advantage of the player’s strengths is the best way to go.
However, what is usually the case is that the 1000-1400 player’s long-term goals are not to win the World Open. They want to get to the next level and become a stronger player.
This long-term goal is the basis of why I disagree that the ‘Give a 1200 player some openings and strategies that maximize his short-term results’ is a good idea, unless that 1200 has given up on trying to become a 1400 or 1500. And since almost all my students have long-term goals to become much better players, I think this ‘hide the weakness’ approach could be more harmful than helpful in the long run.
I often run into students who don’t know how to analyze or evaluate very well. So, when they need to find a move and are asked to think out loud for me during a lesson, they ‘hand-wave’ a bunch of generalities and move on general principles rather than concrete lines. And indeed, playing openings that avoid early complications can aid them in playing this way, but if they really want to become better players, they should not avoid what they can’t do very well, but indeed meet these limitations head on by practicing careful analysis and evaluation, not taking steps to avoid it.
One gets better at something (say a weakness), by learning how to do it correctly and practicing it, not by masking that weakness. Masking works great for players who have already peaked and are trying to get maximum results; not so much for players aspiring to improve who are strongly held back by their weaknesses.
I call this approach ‘Playing/learning to maximize learn-term learning rather than playing/learning to maximize short-term results.’
Of course, my suggestion assumes you can practice your weaknesses – let’s say it includes visualization during analysis – in a positive way. But that is one of the things instructors and exercises are supposed to be for – improving a student’s skills. The instructor can’t just say “That was a mistake!” – he/she has to show the student how to analyze different types of positions, ways to practice/improve visualization, etc.
When trying to improve visualization, everyone does not benefit from the same approach. Most strong players became excellent at visualization just be playing thousands of long time control games slowly and carefully visualizing on every move. Practice may not make perfect, but it can make ‘much better’. In the age of the internet, some players attempt shortcuts via visualization exercises, and there are dozens of websites that use different methods. I suggest to my students “Try some of those websites and the ones that are most fun have the best chance of helping.”
With openings, beginners are often taught to open 1.e4 to learn how to fight from the first move. I agree with this approach! Varying this when you get to 1000 because you are still weak at tactics seems like going down the wrong path...
Tip 17
It is not how much you learn per unit game or book or puzzle that matters most; it is how much you learn per unit time. Therefore, if you read annotated games faster you get less from each game but read more games, so it becomes a trade-off. I chose to read as many games and authors as possible.
One of my basic homeworks for students is to read as many annotated games as possible. It is the main source that – if the author does a good job – covers all aspects of chess: openings, middlegames, endgames, principles, analysis, evaluation, time management, positional features. Because of all these benefits, I think most chess coaches suggest their students (except young scholastics) read annotated games, However, their advice on how to do so varies quite extensively.
Some coaches suggest that each game be read multiple times to get the most understanding out of the positions and annotations. Others suggest that the students ‘guess’ every move beforehand, playing one or both sides along with the players. Many coaches don’t differentiate much between various sub-genres of game books, putting excellent but non-instructive books like Fischer’s
My 60 Memorable Games
and
Karpov’s Best Games
alongside instructive anthologies like Chernev’s
The Most Instructive Games of Chess Ever Played
or Nunn’s more advanced
Understanding Chess Move by Move
.
There is no doubt you learn more playing over a game three times than you do reading it only once. And if there were a very restricted number of books and games, this approach might make sense. But economists have a concept (used quite a bit outside of economics) called diminishing returns. It means that the more you repeat something, the less you get out of it each time.
To make a rough (and admittedly simplified) model with some basic math, suppose each time you read a game, you get a benefit of 50% of what you did not know before that reading. Therefore, the first time you read a game, you only learn 50% of what you maximally could have learned. The second time you also get 50%, but only 50% of the 50% you did not already learn in the first pass, a total of 25% more. That means the second time through you have learned 50%+25% = 75% total new information. A third time through would get 50% of the unlearned 25%, for an additional 12.5% and a total gain of 87.5%.
Now 87.5% is certainly more than 50%, but suppose instead of reading one game three times, you read three games one time and got 50% out of each. If we make the plausible but only vaguely approximate suggestion that the benefit of reading each game, in the long run, is roughly the same, it is better to get 50% from each of three games in the same time it takes to get 87.5% from one game thrice. Of course, this model is a simplification and some games are more instructive than others, but in the long run this idea holds.
When I started out, I did not have a chess coach, but I did talk to many stronger players. In my first two years I went from unrated to 1900 USCF, and got to 2000 in my third year. In those days ratings were much lower so I actually made the USCF ‘Top-25 junior’ list by my fourth year of tournament play.
One method that helped me greatly was to read as many annotated games by as many authors as quickly as possible. When I first started out, this was a little difficult because I did not have the ‘board vision’ to absorb an entire position at a glance, but once I could, I simply got out a board (usually a pocket chess set for convenience so I could do it anywhere, like at my grandmother’s house while she and my mother were making dinner), made the move, read what the author had to say about the viewed position, got to the next move, the next, and then to the subsequent game and finally to the next book.
My estimate is that I read about 2,000 annotated games in three years, roughly two per day. People ask me “Did you play over all the side variations?” My answer is “No, only the ones that either looked fun or I was curious about!” Then they say, “But if you played over the games that fast, didn’t you learn a lot less than if you had studied them more slowly?” My answer to that is always “Only if you measure learning, by how much you learn per unit game. But that is, in many senses, a false measurement; I wanted to get better as fast as I could, so the correct unit of measurement is how much I learned per unit time.”
If you asked me to replay any of those games, I could not (well, maybe Morphy against Count Isouard and the Duke of Brunswick). But I had seen the same important lessons many times – how and when to use pawn majorities, good and bad pieces, how to play almost every opening imaginable, where the pieces flowed at various phases of the game, etc. These tactical and positional aspects, especially the important ones, tended to occur frequently in the most instructive games. Even though I was skipping many sidelines and read games quickly, I spent many, many hours going through all those games, in a sense learning by gestalt.
Would this work for everyone? No – first, it must be fun! Why did I do this? Was it just to become a better player? No, it was because it was so much fun that every time I finished a game I hoped I had time to do the next one. If reading those games is work, you won’t do it for long.
This idea of getting the most per unit time rather than per unit game, puzzle, or anything is, I think, important, especially with finite time but many resources.
Tip 18
One of the most important things you can do is review your slow games with your opponent.
I was surprised when I found how many players either don’t review their games with their opponent or failed to understand how helpful that is. Of course, it is more difficult to review your game with your opponent when you are online than it is over-the-board, but in each case if you have the time, you should offer to do so.
One obvious benefit of reviewing the game with the opponent, as opposed to anybody or anything (in the case of engines), is that they are the only ones that can explain why they did or did not do things, like make certain moves or carry out ideas and plans. Without that information the complete story (and thus opportunities to learn) cannot be formed.
Some players only want to review games with stronger opponents, feeling this gives them somewhat of a free lesson. It is true that they are the best opponent for which a game review would be most helpful, but it is also beneficial to do it with equal or lesser opponents. It is easily seen that the reason you should want to do it with lesser opponents is that, from their viewpoint, they are the ones reviewing it with the stronger opponent (you!), and if you feel you benefit from reviewing with stronger opponents, you should grant your weaker opponents the same benefit! Play it forward...
What about opponents of equal strength? The good news is that equal strength does not mean equal knowledge and understanding of all areas. Your opponent may be of equal strength, but may know the opening much better, or understand the pawn structure better. In that sense two equal players can ‘bootstrap’ each other, much in the same way a ‘study buddy’ of equal strength can help a study session.
What are some of the main things to review after the game?
• Opening – where could each player improve.
• Complications and critical moments – move the pieces around and analyze to see what could have happened.
• Find the losing move – if someone won, identify the moment where the losing side could have played a better move to save the game. Sometimes identifying the losing move is trivial, but other times finding it takes a great deal of analytical work!
Tip 19
*Top-10 Tip*
Think of a draw offer as an offer to remain ignorant of what you would have learned the remainder of the game.
As a professional chess instructor, I get a biased sample of the chess world – almost 100% of my students take lessons so they can improve. Not everyone who plays chess has a main goal of improvement, but a large percentage do.
If your goals include improvement then, when you are playing a game, you want to not just try to win, but also do things that will help you become better in future games. That may include a variety of suggestions that I have discussed in this book and other places, like looking up your openings after the game to avoid repeating the same mistakes or reviewing your game with your opponent, strong players, and possibly a chess engine.
Just as playing more tournaments will give you more experience, so will playing more moves! If you play long time control games and practice good time management, you will often have opportunities to play a variety of challenging endgames.
However, many players try to shortcut the game and avoid this learning experience by offering premature draws. This could be for a variety of reasons. They are:
• Wish to gain rating points so they offer draws to higher-rated players,
• Are afraid of their opponent,
• Feel that they are not very good at endgames, and/or
• Are afraid of losing so bail out even in clearly winning positions.
I see these premature draw offers quite often, and advise my students according to the following axiom – play and learn! The worst thing that will happen to you is that you make a mistake and lose, but then you learn something and are a better player for future games. Sure, there are many ‘dead-drawn’ positions, such as those with bishops of opposite colors, where you won’t learn anything by continuing and a offering and/or taking a draw is wise. And sometimes there are external circumstances: not feeling well/tired, a prize at stake, or a family emergency that necessitate otherwise unwise draw offers.
Best is to emulate Bobby Fischer, who was famous for refusing draw offers before his opponent could finish the sentence: “Do you want a...” – “No!”
Tip 20
It is easy to obtain, study, and understand material that is inappropriate for what you need to get to the next level, so beware and try to avoid this trap.
Assume you are supposed to be taking a class in Russian 2, but accidentally walk into a Russian 5 class. Would you quickly notice that the other students and the material are beyond your current abilities and realize that you are in the wrong class? I bet you would!
Similarly, assume you are studying math and are up to Algebra I, but someone gives you a Calculus II book to read. Would that be an easy read for you? I think you would probably look at a couple of pages, realize the issue, and put it aside for a few years.
But unfortunately, chess is much different. Suppose you know most of the basic definitions, like what is the difference between a capture and an attack, winning the exchange versus coming out ahead in a trade, what an isolated, doubled, or backward pawn is (well, maybe not backward pawn; most of my students think they know, but are usually incorrect). If you know about open and semi-open files and can recognize the Queen’s Gambit Declined, as most players rated 1200+ can, then you can understand 95%+ of most chess books ever written.
And that is the problem! It would be much better if chess were like Russian or math, and players could instantly recognize a book that is inappropriate for what they need to learn to get to the next level. But chess is not like those subjects.
So now we have the worst of all possible worlds:
• Most players can read almost all the material, no matter how inappropriate.
• The material is usually not presented in a classroom situation. If it were in a classroom, material would not be introduced until it is next in the logical progression of what the students know and need. Instead, purchasing chess material is more often in a fashion of the Old West in the US, where anything goes.
• Publishers and authors of advanced material want to sell that material and make money, but the overwhelming potential audience to purchase that material are players under average tournament strength (including non-tournament players who may purchase), so the temptation is to find ways to market the material as being good for everyone, or at least the average player.
The result of the situation is that when I get a new student, there is a very strong chance that at least some of the material they are currently reading is inappropriately ‘too high’ for them. To make a further analogy with schoolwork, it’s as if my third grade student currently is using the textbooks
Read with Dick and Jane
,
War and Peace
,
Plane Geometry
,
Introduction to Gene Therapy
,
Advanced Thermodynamics
, and
Fuzzy Wuzzy learns to Count
!
When I try to explain to new students why some of their texts are inappropriate, many get defensive. They tell me how much they enjoy the book or how much they are getting out of it. It doesn’t matter that they are making unsafe moves; they want to know more about the Caro-Kann. And yes, by the way, they are stuck at a 1200 rating; how should they get out of that? (Tip #89)
I was having this conversation with Michael de la Maza, who wrote
Rapid Chess Improvement
. Michael related the story that when he was stuck at 1400 and could not figure out how to rise above that level, someone suggested he read Silman’s
How To Reassess Your Chess
. Michael read the book, especially the early edition’s emphasis on good knight versus bad bishops and vice versa, and thought “Aha, I didn’t know this stuff! This is just what I need!” So he went out and played an endgame with a knight versus a bishop and spent time thinking about how to get a good knight against a bad bishop. Then he said, “I dropped my knight!”
The moral of Michael’s story was to back up what he and I both believed, the content of this tip. Michael was still at the level where he was not consistently making safe moves and, when you are still at that level, you get diminishing returns (if not negative) on most issues other than those that help you more consistently make safe moves.
Those issues would include good time management and a good thought process, which in turn allow you the time to consistently check to see if your candidate moves are safe, along with good ‘board vision’ to see what is happening all over the board quickly and accurately, and an excellent grasp on basic tactical motifs, not just so you can solve them, but so you can recognize them quickly and accurately (Tip #91).
In most disciplines, if you study advanced material before you master the basics, you likely will not be able to understand it well anyway. If you are learning basic arithmetic and someone hands you a calculus book, you won’t be able to use it. But chess is not like that: any experienced adult chess player who understands basic concepts like weak pawns or tactical motifs, can understand almost anything written in the most advanced chess books. But therein lies the problem: when they read those books, instead of putting them down for more appropriate material, they think like de la Maza “Aha!, this is just what I needed...”
Tip 21
There are many good books of all levels and what may work for one person at one level may not work for another.
I often find adults under the ‘Hope Chess’ level (1600-1700 USCF/FIDE, 2000 LiChess; Tip #65) who don’t consistently make safe moves, working too much on openings, rare exact endgames or advanced positional concepts when that’s not what’s preventing them from improving.
Sometimes new students ask something along the lines of “What is your program for getting a player, like me, from 1400 to 1600?” It is a reasonable question, but the underlying assumption that all 1400s have the same strengths and weaknesses, and thus need to do the same work to improve, is not generally true.
For example, some players move much too quickly and some players move much too slowly. Some players are addicted to fast games and others – at the same level – hate them because they get frustrated they can’t consistently make good moves.
Some class players like to memorize openings and others think openings should never be studied, and end up making the same mistakes early in the game over and over, year after year. When I first started working with NM Josh Bowman, when he was about 11, he knew an inordinate amount of opening theory for someone his rating, which was then about 1100. I told Josh, “Put away your opening books for a year or two; what you need to become the next level has nothing to do with openings; you know openings better than many players rated 1600, so that’s not your problem.”
Even the same exercises may not work for two players of identical strengths and weaknesses. There are many visualization websites and exercises; yet I have found that what works for one person may be completely useless for someone else. As an example, more than one website uses blindfold identification of the color of the squares as a visualization aid and tool; that never worked for me and some of my students, but apparently it has helped quite a few others (I get asked about it every now and then). I got most of my visualization skills from playing very many long time control games slowly and trying to visualize the pieces when doing analysis on every analytical move. In this sense practice may not make perfect, but it can sure make you better.
I loved Kmoch’s
Pawn Power in Chess
, but others do not because of its arcane nomenclature (Tip #78). Chess work helps more when it is fun (Tip #77).
Tip 22
When you purchase a chess book electronically, an ebook, consider buying it on an app that makes the book ‘come alive’ like Forward Chess.
When you purchase a chess book ‘hard copy’, you are paying for the printing and the distribution. If you purchase it on Kindle, you are bypassing some of the cost, but the problem is that Kindle is primarily an adjustable electronic picture of the book. That has some advantages like you can read it on your mobile device or you can change the size of the font. But to take full advantage of the electronic version of a chess book, much better to purchase it on Forward Chess (or a competing app if there is one), The advantages of using Forward Chess are:
• It is an ebook, so like Kindle you save publishing costs (it is less expensive) and can read it on your mobile device.
• Forward Chess connects the moves in a chess book with a chess board. So when you click on the moves, you get a diagram of that chess position. This diagram is not just for the main moves of a game in a game book, but also the side variations, puzzle answers, etc. Therefore, unlike Kindle or a hard copy, you get an automatic electronic board and don’t need a real board or a third party electronic board – it is all built into Forward Chess!
Because they have most of the mobile ‘chess reader’ market, Forward Chess offers an extensive library of current and classic titles to potential buyers. At the time of this writing, their website forwardchess.com/products lists over 1,000 titles, and is growing by the week.
A curious final note: Forward Chess publishes several of my titles, so I asked Forward Chess why they did not publish one of my best books,
The Improving Chess Thinker
. Their answer was interesting: because the de Groot ‘think out loud’ exercise requires students to give ‘stream of conscious’ chatter about everything going through their head when they make a move, the disconnected nature of the moves they mention does not go well with the Forward Chess benefit of showing a diagram, since there often is not the flow of moves out of a position that you see in a game, puzzle, or side variation. Therefore, it was difficult, if not impossible, for Forward Chess to transfer the thoughts of the players into meaningful diagrams using the app’s main benefit, their ‘live’ board.
Tip 23
Just as a chain is only as strong as its weakest link, you are only as good as your weakest moves.
I cannot tell you how many times I have heard from both students and lower-rated club players “I was playing a higher-rated player and I had a good game for 20-25-30 moves but then x happened and I threw it all away.”
Many of these players therefore deceive themselves into thinking that they are just as good, or at least on the doorstep, of being as good as the player with whom they had an even position until the game got complicated or critical. But the time when it is most obvious that the better player outplays the weaker one is not early with opening knowledge or principles (although that too happens); it’s much more likely to occur when the position is complicated, a critical strategic choice has to be made, careful endgame analysis must be done, and/or when time is running short and critical decisions need to be made quickly.
For example, if you play like a 1600 for 40 moves and then play like a 700 for the next move, that is usually enough to lose to most 1600s. There was a recent game at our club between a 2000 player and a 1500 player. The 2000 player made a mistake early in the game and lost a pawn for just fair compensation. But he was able to hang in and eventually win the pawn back to achieve a fairly equal but dynamic endgame. However, once the time for both players started to run short, the 1500 player fell apart and eventually resigned as he put his rook en prise trying to stop the 2000 player from promoting a pawn.
This tip is one of the biggest reasons why lower-rated players’ infatuation with memorizing opening theory is so misguided. It is not that knowing more about the opening is wrong or unhelpful; it is much more that the ability to quickly and accurately analyze and evaluate positions, especially critical ones, is far more likely to decide the game.
Admittedly, it is easier to learn a new line in the Nimzo-Indian than it is to become a clearly better player when time is short and critical decisions must be made. But that is why good coaches emphasize homework and competitive slow play to help students slowly develop a better recognition of critical positions with more knowledge, skills, and abilities that can deal with those situations better. Like in all sports, there are very few panaceas or verbal epiphanies that instantly allow a weaker player to become magically much better.
I improved greatly when I realized I could not just make a move, wait for my opponent to reply, and if they made a check, capture, or threat hope that I had an answer. My epiphany was when I understood that I had to look at least one move ahead to make sure I had a safe answer next move to any dangerous reply from the opponent. But although that one enormous realization made a big difference in my play, I did not jump from 1400 to 1900 overnight – it still took me about 18 months of consistent tournament play, going to the strong Germantown Chess Club and picking the brains of some of the best players, and reading about 2,000 annotated master games. It was a lot of fun work!
During that time, I also realized that even though my older and more experienced players had better knowledge, such as in the openings, if I could just follow good opening principles, make safe moves, and ‘hang in there’ until the game got complicated, I had good chances. All I needed to do was to recognize when the game got critical (‘criticality assessment’), take my time on the most critical moves, and try to ‘out-analyze’ my opponent during those crucial situations. This strategy worked amazingly well as it took me up to 1900 quite rapidly by outplaying players rated 1600-1800. It was not until I got to 1900 and was being outplayed in even material endgames by equally analytical 2000 players that I found I had to learn much more about subtle positional strategy.
My experience was comparable to the reason why Michael de la Maza, author of
Rapid Chess Improvement
, gave up chess; he also found he could move up among class players with a similar strategy of mastering the most important basics in safety, board vision, time management, and activity. But when he got his rating up to USCF expert level (2000), he told me he would have to do some real work to learn about chess in order to improve further, and he felt it was not worth it! I had gone through a similar path, so I understood, but unlike Michael, I had decided to do that extra work to reach one more level before ‘real life’ intervened.
Tip 24
Don’t try to hide your weaknesses or downplay your worst moves; find out what you need to improve most and concentrate on those areas.
Suppose your rating is 1400 and, on the average, you know book moves for about six moves into your openings. Your playing strength for those moves is maybe 3500. If an average game is about 40 moves, what is your playing strength for the other 34 moves if your final rating is 1400? I think most would agree it is about 1400.
Now suppose further that you lock yourself in a closet for many months and try to memorize enough opening lines that you know all your openings to about eight moves deep (it could take longer...). What is your playing strength for the other 32 moves? 1400, of course. But now what impact has learning all those new opening lines had on your overall rating? It is still going to be about 1400, maybe a little over.
Let us go further and give you a pill that will enable you to memorize an entire book about one of your major openings (White, Black vs 1.e4, or Black vs 1.d4). That is more than most humans could likely learn in a lifetime. What’s your rating now? 1400? If you take three pills and learn all your major openings that deeply, what could that do to an otherwise 1400 player? Maybe if he/she is very lucky, make them a 1500? If so, what does that say about studying openings if you are 1400 and aspire to be 2000?
To become a much better player you cannot just learn a bunch of knowledge (Tip #13). That is very helpful, of course, but what you also must do is improve your skills, such as analysis, evaluation, and time management.
Sometimes I have a new student who tells me they have recent games, but they want to show me their subtle endgame losses, not the games where they put their queen en prise. That is understandable, but if it turns out they put pieces en prise every few games, those horrible mistakes are going to have a much bigger effect on their playing strength than the subtle mistakes they make in the endgame.
These players often say “I know what I did wrong; I didn’t see the bishop on the diagonal” or something similar. But from my instructor standpoint, I want to know
why
they did not see the bishop. Did they:
• Play too quickly.
• Lack the ‘board vision’ to see the bishop on the other side of the board.
• Execute a poor thought process that never checked to see if the queen move was safe?
Once we can identify the source of these important issues, then we can begin to take steps that will lessen the probability that this player will continue to put pieces
en prise. If we can eliminate, or at least minimize, the big mistakes first, then we can work on the next most egregious mistakes or misconceptions. In this manner we get the biggest ‘bang for the buck’ for our lesson and study time.
It is natural for players who find out about advanced ideas like how to win a Lucena endgame to then want to learn those advanced ideas and, on the surface, doing so may not seem really harmful. But just as you want to learn the multiplication tables before doing interesting geometry, chess is best learned from filling in the basics first.
I tell the story that I was already in the Top-25 juniors in the US when I lost a rook and pawn endgame because I did not know the Philidor endgame draw well enough. Yet my lack of that ‘basic’ knowledge did not stop me from becoming stronger than 95% of tournament players ever get. This experience told me it was important to learn the Philidor, but that type of specific knowledge, while very helpful, is not that necessary to become a very strong player.
Similarly, I read the story of how Victor Korchnoi, when a young grandmaster, did not properly know the rules for castling. His opponent had castled queenside and the rook had passed through an attacked square (b1 or b8); Korchnoi thought that was illegal, but his amused opponent told him it was legal and that he should check with the arbiter. The arbiter further explained that it was only the king that could not pass through an attacked square when castling. The moral is the same: you can become a very strong player without getting some isolated basic ideas correct, so long as you are very proficient with the most important aspects of the game like analysis and evaluation, especially with regards to tactical/safety issues, and have a good grasp on strategy.
Tip 25
Chess is a mental game, so anything that affects your concentration or stamina can have a large effect: outside worries, conditioning, illness/headache, concerns about chess factors not involving the current move, etc
.
Good players are able to concentrate on almost every move of every game, but weaker players are often distracted by issues that probably should be resolved before or after the game. When I review games with students, quite often lower-rated students will answer queries about their questionable decisions with answers something like:
• “I was still upset about not seeing his pawn was hanging two moves ago.”
• “I knew I was losing so I was not paying attention when he blundered.”
• “My girlfriend came into the room so I was not paying as much attention as I should.”
• “I was getting tired, so instead of getting up and stretching or getting a glass of water, I kept playing and moved too fast.”
There are many other similar issues that crop up to cause mistakes. Some distractions are unavoidable, but it goes without saying that weaker players are much more likely to fall victim to these types of problems.
The way I often state this issue is “Anything that you are thinking about during your move which is not related to finding the best move you can in a reasonable amount of time is likely counter-productive.”
If you made a mistake, ‘there’s no crying over spilt milk’ – it is over and done with, and worrying about it when you should be concentrating on the current move is not helpful.
Therefore, when playing, keep in mind that you want to concentrate on the current move, or maybe the near-term plan. But worrying about things that happened earlier in the game, or wondering what you are going to do after the game should be kept to a minimum, if not eliminated.
Tip 26
Don’t stop your opponent from making bad moves.
I think this tip speaks for itself! Here is a recent example from a student’s game:
Black to play
In this position Black has the advantage because his minor pieces are more active and White’s queenside pawns are a little vulnerable. Black can keep his king in the center and connect rooks with 1...Kd7 or try to open a second line for his rooks with 1...a6.
The move he chose in the game was not bad, but his reason for it was! He played
1...d5
, which fixes the white central pawns and removes a black pawn from the dark squares for his bishop’s later mobility. But his primary reason was to prevent White from ‘gaining space’ and attacking his knight with d4-d5.
However, if Black
knew
White was going to play d4-d5 he should let him do it! That move greatly increases the scope of the bishop on the long diagonal (it is no longer hitting a pawn guarded by a pawn), and forces the knight to a occupy White’s weak square, ...Ne6-c5. If after 1...Kd7 if White plays 2.Kd2 Black’s advantage is about ‘+1’, but if 2.d5? Nc5 Black’s advantage is ‘+5.3’!
Here’s another example from our chess club last night:
1.e4 c5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.f4 d6 4.Nf3 Bg4 5.Be2
.
Black to play
Here Black played
5...a6
. Later, I asked him why and he responded that he didn’t like the look of 6.Bb5. But White has just played 5.Be2; he could have already played Bb5 on his fifth move, and he didn’t! So if we told Black to make another fifth move and White would respond 6.Bb5, Black should be happy that White is moving a piece twice, especially to a square he could have moved to originally in one move, and which makes no serious threat. In other words, Black is spending a tempo playing 5...a6 to prevent a move he should be happy to see!
If Black had given another reason such as “I wanted to expand on the queenside with ...b7-b5” or “I was planning to put my queen on c7, so I need to shield myself from a later Nc3-b5 after also playing ...e7-e6 to stop Nc3-Nd5” then this example would not have made it into this book. But as soon as he said he wanted to stop a move he should have welcomed, I thought of this tip! Here is a third example from a recent student game:
Black to play
In this position Black should just play something like 1...0-0, while the engine prefers 1...Nd4.
But instead, Black played
1...a6
. When I asked my student why he played 1...a6, he said he wanted to stop 2.Nb5. But when I asked him what 2.Nb5 did that made it worth stopping, he said he did not know.
Instead if Black plays, say, 1...0-0 and White does play 2.Nb5, the knight is not threatening anything. Therefore, if Black then plays 2...a6, that makes some sense since it costs one tempo to play 2...a6, but costs White two tempi to play 2.Nb5 and then retreat the knight next move. On the other hand, playing 1...a6 to stop 2.Nb5 just costs Black a tempo he could have used constructively elsewhere.
One final example from a well-known ‘exact’ endgame:
Black to play
I call this the ‘dance around maneuver’ because Black is going to win the d-pawn and White needs to ‘dance around’ the d2-square, not going there until after Black captures on d4, so White can get the opposition and draw: for example,
1...Kc4 2.Ke2 Kc3
(or 2...Kxd4 3.Kd2)
3.Ke1
(or any square that touches d2), and if
3...Kxd4 4.Kd2
with an opposition draw (this well-known exact endgame could finish 4...Ke4 5.Ke2 d4 6.Kd2 d3 7.Kd1! Ke3 8.Ke1 d2+ 9.Kd1 Kd3 stalemate).
Notice that 1...Kc4 is the most accurate because an unsuspecting white player might play 2.Kd2?? and after 2...Kxd4 Black has the opposition and wins.
It therefore would be clearly less practical for Black to play 1...Kc3, even though this also draws because it would give White no chance to play 2.Kd2 (don’t stop your opponent from making bad moves!). After 1...Kc3 2.Ke2 Kxd4 even unsuspecting players would probably stumble into 3.Kd2.
From this analysis, we can conclude that while 1...Kc4 and 1...Kc3 are both draws, only 1...Kc4 gives White an initial chance to go wrong.
Tip 27
Principles do not need to be applied to either book opening or book endgame moves, or moves where your analysis tells you which move is clearly best. Principles are best applied in situations where you do not know what to do and analysis does not indicate a clearly best move.
A principle, unlike a rule, is a guideline, a heuristic. They are meant to help you if you don’t know what to do. But there are two cases where principles are not needed:
• If your analysis clearly reveals a best move, or one where you can prove that no other move could possibly be better.
• In ‘book’ positions in the opening and endgame.
Therefore, if you are in the opening and the engine, database, book, and/or master videos all say that in that exact same position you should move a piece twice, then you don’t care that the most important principle in the opening is ‘Move every piece once before you move any piece twice, unless there’s a tactic.’
Suppose you study the old main line in the Two Knights Defense,
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5
.
Black to play after 4.
N
g5
There is the trick question: Does 4.Ng5 violate the principle
that in the opening, move every piece once before you move any piece twice, unless there is a tactic?
Literally, it does seem to violate that principle, as no one could argue against the fact that the white knight has moved twice before some of the other pieces have moved once. Plus the fact that 4.Ng5 is a threat, but it is not a tactic; White threatens 5.Nxf7 or 5.Bxf7+, but that threat is easily parried by the main response 4...d5.
But here we reach a question of definition, opinion, and semantics: 4.Ng5 is a book move. It is acceptable (close to best) for both grandmasters and engines. If you studied that move and played it with the knowledge that it is recommended, then you don’t need to follow principles for that move; they simply would not apply. So in that strong sense 4.Ng5 is not violating the ‘don’t move pieces twice’ principle.
The next twist: suppose the player playing White does not know any book and plays 4.Ng5. Since he is not following book knowledge, we could conclude that he
is
violating the ‘don’t move any piece twice’ principle.
A final bit of semantics: Suppose that same book-lacking player mistakenly thought that 4.Ng5, for whatever reason, was a tactic. Then could we switch 180 degrees once more and say he is not violating the principle because it states that moving pieces twice for the purposes of executing – or avoiding – a tactic is often acceptable!
When I was teaching NM Dan Benjamin, I told Dan, “If your analysis clearly reveals the best move, then it doesn’t matter how many principles it violates; just do it!” Another way of saying this is: If you are willing to argue with a room full of grandmasters that none of them can prove a clearly superior move to the one you intend, then that is a sufficient ‘trigger’ to stop thinking and play it.
Tip 28
When multiple principles conflict, ask yourself which ones are the more important or best apply to the current state of the position.
There are many – to put it mildly – situations in chess where you are not in a ‘book’ position and your analysis may not yield a clearly best move. That is when you want to take your time and augment your analysis with as many principles as might possibly apply to that position. In those situations, if all the principles point to one move, there is a good chance that this move is a strong candidate, if not the clearly best move.
Suppose your analysis does not yield a clearly best move, multiple principles apply, and they conflict by pointing toward multiple moves. In those situations, you need to use your experience and judgement to augment your analysis and knowledge of the principles.
For example, if there are few pawns on the board and you are ahead on material, and one principle says ‘In deep endgames you need pawns to promote to win the game, so don’t trade too many pawns’ and another principle says ‘Trade off your opponent’s dangerous pawns that have promotion potential’, then you could ask “How dangerous is my opponent’s pawn?” If you get rid of your opponent’s pawn, will that leave you with enough material to win the game? If you do not get rid of your opponent’s pawn, will it threaten to promote and cause you to lose your material advantage? In those situations, one usually needs the extra pawn(s) to win, but it depends on the position.
The following position illustrates the conflict of the two above principles:
White to play after 1...c6
If White does not capture the pawn but instead plays 2.d6, then Black will have a passed c-pawn. If White allows Black the option of capturing his d-pawn, he will be left with only one pawn on the board.
From the above, which principle would be the stronger one here? If White retains the pawn with 2.d6, is either Black’s c-pawn sufficiently dangerous or can Black just win the d-pawn anyway with 2...Kc5?
Finding the correct answer requires both judgement and analysis. If 2.d6 Kc5 White can save the pawn with 3.Nf5 or possibly 3.Ne4+. If White trades the pawns, or does nothing and allows Black to trade, then his extra knight might be meaningless if Black can sacrifice his knight for White’s final pawn, since a king and two knights cannot force checkmate against a lone king (there are mating positions, but the knights cannot force the king into them unless it is already in an almost mate, awkward position). The threat of Black sacrificing his knight for the last remaining pawn would make the win difficult, to say the least.
Moreover, if 2.d6 the passed black c-pawn is not that dangerous, so the correct idea is to follow the principle that suggests that when you are ahead on material, unless you are a rook or more ahead, you want to retain enough pawns to threaten to promote. Therefore,
2.d6
is by far the best move to try to win.
Sometimes one guideline is more important than the other because it involves the likely outcome of the game, while the other principle only involves the relative values of the pieces. Or one principle may be more pertinent because it applies specifically to the current state of the game while the other is more general and is less effective in the current state. In most cases, when principles conflict, there is often a reason why one might be more helpful. In the occasional case where the principles conflict and appear to cancel out, use your experience and judgement, backed by some analysis, to determine which moves and/or plans might be the best course of action.
Tip 29
The stronger or more important a principle is, the more vital it is to know it, understand it, and try to follow it.
Strong principles are ones with few exceptions, almost rules.
Important principles are ones which occur frequently or, if violated, could have a major impact on the outcome of a game.
In his book
Grandmaster Secrets: Openings
, GM Andrew Soltis writes: “But there’s at least one bit of development advice that turns out to be true more often than any other...Line up a rook against the enemy queen.”
Most authors have never heard of my definitions of strong and important principles. But if GM Soltis had, it is clear that when he wrote “turns out to be true more often than any other” that would be synonymous with ‘stronger’. So Soltis is claiming that this principle is not just strong, but possibly the strongest opening principle!
In the endgame, the situation with king and pawn versus king where it is not a rook’s pawn, the offensive king is immediately in front of the pawn and the defending king is two squares in front of the offensive king is a common case of the opposition (whoever does
not
have the move has the opposition and gets the result they want with best play). This is a rule, but it does have one exception, when the offensive king is on the sixth rank and it is the offensive king’s move:
White to play
Even though it is White’s move and Black technically has the opposition, this position is a win for White no matter whose move it is; therefore it is the sole exception to the general rule for king and pawn vs king opposition. I call this exceptional situation part of my Tic-Tac-Toe rule (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kzfFjehUSJs), which has no exceptions. Other authors give this exception a different description, like ‘the offensive king has reached one of the critical squares’ (which I think is less specific than my Tic-Tac-Toe rule, but that is just my opinion).
Therefore, a rule is different than a principle such as Soltis’s rook opposite queen advice above, or any of thousands of others, such as those found in Alburt and Lawrence’s
Chess Rules of Thumb
or many in Soltis’s
The Wisest Things Ever Said About Chess
.
If important principles consist of two flavors, common and critical, we should give an example of each:
An important principle because of frequency would be ‘Develop knights before bishops’ (I should add this principle is interpreted as usually NBNB rather than NNBB, so that one can castle as quickly as possible). The principle is important because in every game one should develop all four minor pieces: two knights and two bishops. It is not a strong principle because there are many exceptions where bishops are developed before knights and it is not critical; you can often develop a bishop first without serious consequence.
An important principle that’s less frequent but critical would be ‘When ahead a piece (bishop or knight) in the endgame, make sure you can retain at least one pawn to promote or, in other words, (in those situations) avoid unnecessary trades of too many pawns’ (see the previous Tip #28). This is critical because if you trade your final pawn and are only ahead a piece, even if there are other pieces on the board, it is often impossible to win. For example, most pawnless endgames with rook and minor piece versus a rook are drawn.
Many principles need to be placed in context, such as the intended state of the game for which they are intended or how and why they make sense. I created the definitions of strong and important
to help students better understand principles and how they should be learned and applied.
Tip 30
I saw a recent study confirming an earlier one that the best way to ‘cram’ for a tournament/event is get lots of sleep leading to the event!
You need to be fresh to play. Students often ask: “I have a tournament next weekend. What is the best way to prepare for the event?”
Getting ready for a tournament in some ways resembles getting ready for a test, but in other ways does not. With a test, you are often studying, putting things into your memory (short term and long), that you will have to regurgitate during the test. But in chess events, unless your opponent is playing an opening you just learned and need to remember, it is unlikely getting information into your short-term memory for that time period is going to be very helpful. In that sense, you can’t ‘cram’ for a chess tournament.
Besides getting a lot of rest, there are some things you can do, in moderation, which should help:
• If you are not intimately familiar with how to play games at the time control of the event (*Tip Alert!*), play one or two games a week or so ahead of time at that time control to learn how to pace yourself using the ‘Goldilocks Principle’ of not playing too fast or too slow. You don’t want to wait until you are halfway through the event to realize you are playing too fast or too slow!
• Do some tactical puzzles to warm up. Emphasize ones you do not always catch – many players U1700 often miss ‘removal of the guard’ tactics, so that might be one motif to brush up.
• Review your most frequently met opening tabiyas (standard opening sequences in your repertoire). For example, if everyone is playing the Advanced French (3.e5) against your French Defense, go over the main lines or traps. If instead you are having trouble with Black when opponents play the London, use a book, engine, or video to review how you want to meet that opening.
• There may be some special problem you are having, e.g. maybe forgetting to check if your moves are safe, or playing too fast when your opponent is short on time. If so, you can make a short ‘mental checklist’ of things you want to keep in mind to work on, or improve, for this event. Unfortunately, you cannot consult a physical checklist during a formal over-the-board tournament; it’s against the rules!
• If the games are long enough, prepare an appropriate snack to eat during the game to keep nourished. You can google ‘chess diet’ or something comparable to get some ideas or use the link chess.jliptrap.us/grandmasterdiet.htm (anything that makes noise to eat or shoots up your blood sugar is likely a no-no).
• *Tip Alert!* Go in with a positive attitude! If you think you are going to lose, it often becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. That is another reason it often makes sense not to see an opponent’s rating until after a game.
Finally, do not forget to get lots of rest before and during the event!
Tip 31
If you get tired during a long game, see if you can take a mini-break to splash water on your face, get something to drink (caffeine not suggested!), etc. It is best to start a game fresh, if possible, but when you get tired, a mini-break might be a game-saving move!
When I review slow games with students, some of the common reasons I hear for mistakes later in the game are “I got tired”, “I lost focus” or “I could not concentrate”. We saw in Tip #30 that the best way to prepare for a game is to be fully rested, but either that is not always possible, or even a fully-rested player can run into extremely long games, or multiple tiring games in one day. Therefore, learning to deal with fatigue, hunger, or other bodily issues is part of becoming a good player.
If you have sufficient time on your clock, this gives you the opportunity you might need to re-set your brain. For example, after you make a move, especially one where your opponent has time and will need to take it, get up and do whatever is best to refresh: a restroom break, splash water on your face, get a drink or snack (best to avoid sugar or any ‘quick energy fix’), take a walk, stretch, or maybe even meditate for a few minutes.
Everyone is different and even the same person might require a different type of break depending upon the circumstances. One of my students, who is about the same age as I am, plays in team events on the internet. He has found that during most endgames, he needs a mini-break to splash cold water on his face and, I suppose, take a few deep breaths. When he doesn’t take that break, his play often deteriorates and he makes silly mistakes. When he does take a mini-break, he feels he has a fighting chance.
GM Soltis has written that whenever he goes into an endgame, he gets up and gets a glass of water. He says that is to remind him that endgame principles (and goals) are different than those in the earlier phases. But I would bet that this also serves as a mini-break where he can stretch his legs and clear his mind.
Sometimes when you are competing and your adrenaline is running you are not aware that you are tired or hungry. So be aware that adrenaline may ‘mask’ your real needs. Finally, don’t wait until your clock is so low that it is too late to refresh. Be proactive about these mini-breaks – better safe than sorry!
Tip 32
Know the Rules!
Whether you are playing online or, especially, over-the-board, it is very helpful, almost necessary, to understand some of the common rules. At our local club, despite us announcing some of the more common rules to know periodically, we have incidents many weeks where the players not knowing – or knowing, but not following – the rules cause problems.
Before getting into any details, there is one meta-rule to know which supersedes all the others:
If anything unusual or out-of-the-ordinary is happening in your game, don’t discuss it or argue with your opponent, and don’t try to resolve it by yourself. Stop the game and get the tournament director (arbiter), describe the situation, and let him/her resolve it.
I cannot tell you the number of times players, especially those who should know better, failed to get the tournament director, tried to resolve an issue with their opponent, and adversely affected the outcome of the game. It happens all the time, unfortunately.
The important point is that although the rule book is rather large, you don’t need to know most of it; this one rule about getting the tournament director removes the onus from the players and puts the knowledge of the rules where it belongs.
Having said that, here are some rules that are helpful to know. Many of these rules apply more to over-the-board play (and thus fall under the jurisdiction of FIDE or country rules, like the US Chess Federation, the USCF), while some may also apply to online play (where each server makes their own rules):
• Only the two players can be involved with the game. Spectators cannot interfere if they see an illegal move or other issues; spectators who notice a problem can alert the tournament director. In some cases, the tournament director can interfere without being called, but most of the time the tournament director only becomes involved when alerted by one of the players.
• The correct way to offer a draw over-the-board is to make a move, take your hand off the piece, offer the draw with your clock still running, and then press the clock to let your opponent think about it. The opponent then has three choices: verbally decline or accept the draw while thinking on their next move, or make a move, which de facto declines the draw. An illegal draw offer made by a player while they are thinking about their own move must stand after that player makes a move.
• You can’t ‘beg’ for a draw. The USCF rule is that once you have offered a draw and it is declined, you can’t offer another draw unless either the opponent has offered a draw in-between, or the position has changed substantially. Unfortunately, some online servers have no implementation of this rule, and players can hit the draw offer button repeatedly even on the same move. This is rude and annoying, to say the least; I once had someone hit the draw offer button dozens of times in an online speed game where I was winning and, when I refused to play him again, he brashly typed at me “What did I do?”.
• An illegal move is only established once the clock is pressed (before that it is just subject to the ‘touch move’ rule), and must be claimed to the tournament director by the opponent. A normal penalty in a classic time control would be to add two minutes to the opponent’s clock (USCF), but a recent FIDE rules change makes that only one minute in a rapid game.
• Touch move has three aspects:
i. If you purposely touch a piece, you must move it (but accidentally knocking over a piece is not subject to the touch move rule).
ii. If you purposely touch an opponent’s piece, you must capture it. If you both touch a piece and an opponent’s piece that can be captured, but the piece you touch cannot capture that piece, whichever one occurred first must be followed (e.g. if you touch the opponent’s piece first you must capture it with a piece that can capture it).
iii. When you let your hand off a piece (‘determining your move’) then you cannot move it anywhere else, but instead should press the clock (‘completing your move’).
• Players are not allowed to bother their opponents. But that is subjective, so if your opponent is doing something that bothers you, stop your clock and get the tournament director. If the tournament director deems your objection to be valid, he will ask your opponent to stop the annoying behavior, with a punishment that is appropriate to the intent and severity of your opponent’s actions, usually just starting with a warning.
• In over-the-board play, players must press the clock with the same hand they used to move the piece. Otherwise, they could press the clock before they determine their move. Similarly, you cannot make your move until the opponent has pressed the clock; this caused a major controversy in a time scramble during a US Women’s Championship several years ago.
• In over-the-board play, if you want to adjust a piece, you must do it on your own time and, before adjusting, you must make your intentions known by saying “I adjust” or “J’adoube”.
You can only stop the clock if it is your move and you have a legitimate claim/question for the tournament director or the game is over. Shaking hands has no legitimate meaning; one player might think it is a draw offer, while the other thinks it is a resignation. Therefore, the only proper way to resign is to say “I resign” or to purposely tip over your king.
Tip 33
In correspondence (‘daily’) games where databases, books, and moving the pieces is allowed, take full advantage of the rules, to enhance both learning and results.
Many of my students play what formerly was called correspondence chess, but now, through the internet, is commonly called ‘daily chess’, where one has between one to three days to make a move.
Each daily chess site has its own rules, but the most common are that any help except engines or other humans can be used during play. These rules would therefore allow players to use books, videos, databases, plus setting up a board and moving the pieces. These are all devices that are not allowed in serious, over-the-board play. Moreover, the current International Correspondence Chess Federation (iccf.org) rules now allow even engines to be consulted for the world championship (which my friend Jon Edwards won in 2022)! This surprised me; I suppose the reason is it simplifies trying to enforce rules and detect cheating, since once engines are allowed there basically cannot be cheating, except possibly collusion to throw games!
Of my students who play daily chess many play it using personal over-the-board rules; they did not move the pieces or consult books or databases. Some avoiding these aids because they were not aware that they were allowed; others thought they were legal, but personally felt it was unfair in some way; still others wanted to visualize moves like they would in an over-the-board contest.
I suggest my students make full use of any legal aid for the following reasons:
• To not do so would put you at a competitive disadvantage. If your opponent is using a database and you are not, the chances of obtaining a normal opening evaluation is greatly diminished.
• If you carefully study an opening database each move in the opening to choose which line you wish to play, you will likely learn considerably more about that opening than even if you properly looked it up after the game to see what you could have done better.
• Due to limits of the amateur’s visualization and other analysis skills, moving the pieces gives them the opportunity to analyze further and wider, take more time, and learn more about analysis and evaluation skills than they would normally get in a couple of minutes of visualization in an over-the-board game where they cannot move the pieces.
The detriment is that moving the pieces does not allow one to practice as much visualization, but I feel this one drawback is strongly outweighed by the benefits.
Tip 34
Intermediate time controls can hinder improvement.
With the advent of online play, faster time controls among both professionals and amateurs have dramatically increased. But a main reason professionals got so proficient is that in order to learn how to think and qualify for international titles, they had to play hundreds of over-the-board slow events.
*Tip Alert!*
If you want to become a really strong player, playing hundreds, if not thousands of long time control games
(30 minutes with a five-second increment/time delay or preferably slower)
is almost mandatory.
Once you master slow play, your board vision, visualization, and tactical vision increase greatly, which makes it easier to play faster time limits well. Moreover, if you have a good thought process in slow play and are given a faster time control, you know how to best and most efficiently adjust your thought process to do the best you can with less time to think.
But players (mostly online) who think a fast game is three minutes with no increment (3 0) and a slow game is fifteen minutes with a ten-second increment (15 10) have difficulty ever developing the type of proficiency that would lead them to over-the-board titles. Let’s do a little math to figure out the average time per move in a 15 10 game:
Assume 40 moves in a game. That is 15 x 60 seconds plus 40 moves x 10 second increment = 900+400 = 1300 seconds, a little over 30 seconds per move. But if there are three or four reasonable moves, to analyze well you not only have to figure out which ones are safe, you must compare them to see which might give you the best position. For most players, doing that reasonably well is impossible in 30 seconds. But that means some of the most important chess skills are being skimped not learned, or, worse, allowing the formation of bad habits. Those bad habits will be difficult to overcome once a player decides to play the type of serious chess that could result in national and international titles.
Another way of saying this is: If you have never played slow chess and don’t know how to analyze and evaluate carefully, it is very difficult to develop those skills when you are never given adequate time to think.
This is not just idle speculation on my part. Having taught over 1,000 players one to one privately over the past 30 years, and lately having many who play almost exclusively rapid chess online, I see these problems manifested in many of my students.
Very often, primarily online players will come to me for lessons and when I ask them their goals, a common one is “I want to be an expert or master.” That is a very good and noble goal, but, at the moment, titles are given out for over-the-board long time controls (30 0 or slower), and not for online rapid games.
My students do not see this as a problem, but it turns out to be, on a consistent basis. When these players attempt to play over-the-board, they are usually surprised that they don’t know how to analyze well, they are poor at visualization because in faster time controls they need not or cannot look very far, their time management is very poor, and the same skills that made them confident in faster time controls seem to somehow elude them when both sides are given more time to think.
Some can adjust quickly, but for most those ‘bad habits’ form a drawback that must be overcome. Superficial thinking, sloppy play, not checking if their moves are safe (hope chess), and hand-waving are common problems in this group.
That is why I write that for most aspiring-to-improve players, intermediate time controls can hinder improvement. Notice I carefully chose the word ‘hinder’. It is not that intermediate time controls necessarily make a player worse. Take any beginner and have him play 1,000 games at 15 10 and at the end he will definitely be much better than he was when he started. But he likely will have trouble switching to longer time controls and his chances of becoming a titled player will not have improved as much as if he had practiced a different playing regime.
What about time controls that are faster than ‘intermediate’? Ironically, those who play consistent slower games (30 5 or preferably much slower) and are proficient enough to enjoy fast chess can often benefit from many fast/blitz games, where they can practice openings, quick tactical sight, and time management. Why is this not quite as detrimental as intermediate time controls?
My theory is that when you play a game with fast enough time controls, it seems ‘less serious’ and doesn’t create the impression that the type of superficial thinking necessary in those games should carry over to the slow games. By separating the time limits between fast and very slow, it is easier for individuals to separate those types of thinking.
Is my theory true for everyone? No, it never is. But it seems to work well enough that I am often able to help those online ‘intermediate’ players get on to a more serious thinking track.
Tip 35
*Top-10 Tip*
Time Management is a major chess skill, so work to develop it like you would other chess skills.
When I first started playing tournament chess, I learned how a chess clock worked, but it wasn’t a major factor since I did not know what to think about and I played much too quickly. But by my fourth tournament I learned better what to think about (what today I call ‘avoiding Hope Chess’; Tip #65) and I began to use almost all my time in games. Most of our games were played at a time limit something like 48 moves in two hours.
I noticed some players played much too slowly and got into unnecessary time trouble, while others played much too quickly and made inferior moves while still retaining enormous time remaining at the end of the game. It was just common sense to me that these errors should not only be avoided, but that they could have an enormous effect on the outcome of the games. Today I call the handling of clock for the entire game ‘macro time management’.
For those at about age 12+ I like to compare macro time management in chess to how you should best use your time when taking an essay test at school or college. If a teacher gives you two hours for an essay test, what is the best way to take the essay? Write two sentences as fast as you can and turn in your essay after two minutes? Write nothing on your paper until there is one minute left and then try to scribble everything you have been thinking about for the first hour and 59 minutes in that remaining minute? Never look at the clock and have no idea how much time you have left? None of these are close to optimal; you should pace yourself to write the best essay (make the best chess moves) you can in the allotted time. Only this way can you try your best (Tip #2).
But there is a second type of time management. The one that says you should allocate different amounts of time to different types of moves in different types of positions. I call this ‘micro time management’ and the aspect of that which is derived from the position (as opposed to the clock situation, like the time control, time remaining, or move number) is called ‘criticality assessment’.
When I started as an instructor, I would tell students “When I was an improving player and I started to analyze well, but I still did not know my openings that well, I would just ‘hang in there’ until the position got complicated. Then I would take my time, analyze carefully, and hopefully outplay my opponent to win despite their greater knowledge.” Therefore, I was recognizing the importance of micro time management and criticality assessment without using those terms.
By 1970 I was an expert and I purchased the book
Tal-Botvinnik 1960
, which reviewed their world championship match of that year. Every move in the book was time-stamped, and I was amazed how much I learned just from seeing on which moves the players spent their time, and how much. I realized how important this must be, and so I incorporated writing down how much time I had remaining after each move (in minutes – the seconds were not that important when I had plenty of time), whenever I played games slow enough to record.
In the intervening years, I have written extensively on most aspects of time management. On my YouTube channel I have videos that help players who play too quickly slow down and those that play too slowly speed up. I tell those that play too slowly that if they play more quickly (normally!), mistakes will happen, but, to paraphrase Rowson in
The Seven Deadly Chess Sins
, to play too slowly to try to avoid these mistakes is an even bigger mistake! Another way of saying this is ‘Don’t beat yourself!’ It is one thing to be outplayed; quite another to play so slowly that you either lose the game on time or make ridiculous moves and lose because you did not have proper time to think, thus beating yourself.
I have also written articles and made videos about criticality assessment. Obviously one type of critical position occurs when the position is complicated. But there are other, non-complicated types of critical positions, such as ones where you decide which side to castle, whether to trade queens, or whether to trade into a king and pawn endgame. In the latter I usually advise “Don’t voluntarily go into a king and pawn endgame unless you are pretty sure you are going to get
the result you want – a draw if you are worse or a win if you are better” (Tip #157).
When you play a game, your resources are mostly your brain, the pieces, and the clock. Everyone understands how the first two are involved, but many underestimate the aspect of time management and its possibly great effect on the outcome of the game.
Tip 36
In most situations, what is important is not how your clock time stands in relation to your opponent’s time, but how your time stands in relation to how much time is reasonable.
When a child says “I want to do it because Johnny did it,” we sometimes hear parents reply: “If Johnny jumped off a cliff would you want to do it, too?”
This is a semi-serious analogy of what happens when you compare clock times with your opponent. Suppose you want to have as much time or more than your opponent in all circumstances, but you are paired with a maniac who plays all his moves immediately. Are you going to do it too so you do not fall behind on time?
I once had a club game with an opponent whom I did not know nor have any information on. The time limit was about 70 minutes with a five-second time delay. My opponent started blitzing off opening moves so I thought, ‘Either this guy knows a lot of book and he’s really strong, or he doesn’t know when to slow down.’ It soon occurred to me it was the latter, so while he continued to play all his moves quickly, I settled down and played at my normal speed.
At one point later in the game I had seven minutes left and my opponent had 67! That would have been cause for alarm if he could have played his moves much more accurately in the three minutes he took and had a decent position. Unfortunately for my opponent, by that point he was dead lost, so it was trivial for me to finish the game without trouble. My point is that I was able to take my time ‘normally’ even while my opponent was getting a large time advantage.
The goal should be obvious if you think about it: you want to use your clock wisely, no matter what your opponent is doing. It is not your clock versus his; it is your time to use the best you can. The ‘macro’ time management goal is to finish a ‘normal’ game using almost all your time without getting into unnecessary time pressure. If you do that, then you have done your best. Sure, if someone blunders on move 12 and resigns on move 14 you will have a ton of time left on your clock. However, like a marathon runner, you need to pace self so that you can try your best whenever a chess game goes the distance.
Does your opponent’s time ever come into consideration? Sure. As will be discussed in Tip #84, in extreme time situations, like mutual time trouble or when one side is desperately short on time and the other is not, there are sometimes adjustments that can be made to optimize your chances (but, as mentioned in #Tip 84, not all these options are the ones usually chosen).
Play your game wisely and let your opponent worry about his clock. Do not jump over the cliff trying to ‘out-do’ someone who is not using their time wisely.
Tip 37
Sometimes time trouble is unavoidable, but do not beat yourself by consistently getting into unnecessary time trouble.
One of the biggest, and most difficult to correct, problems that some students have is playing too slowly. The result is that they get into what I call unnecessary time trouble and often, if not usually, throw the game away.
Sure, there are some games where the situation gets tense, additional time is required for moves and then, instead of resolving into a situation where a player can play more normally and stay on a normal time track, the position remains tense an inordinate number of moves. In this case, it is quite understandable if one or both players run abnormally short on time. We could call this occasional situation ‘normal’ or ‘understandable’ time trouble.
But players who play too slowly get into time trouble regularly even if the position never gets that complicated. They dither and dather for three to five minutes on every opening move, wondering if Bf1-e2 is critically different than Bf1-d3 on the fifth move (it almost never is). Then, when they finally do get a critical position on move 26, instead of having 40 minutes to finish the game, they have four and they make silly mistakes playing quickly and their game crumbles.
In his book
The Seven Deadly Chess Sins
, GM Rowson lists 18 reasons why players might play too slowly, and attempts to debunk all 18 reasons.
When I discuss time management with my slow-playing students, they often protest that if they play more quickly (I call that more reasonably!), they will lose more games earlier because they are more likely to make mistakes. My reply is: “That is true, but for every game that you lose earlier, there will be many more games where you have a fighting chance later in the game and, instead of losing almost all those games because you don’t have time to make reasonable moves, you will draw and win your share of them.”
But even armed with that knowledge, it is still psychologically difficult for many ‘slow’ students to speed up. Fear is a strong driving force, and many of them fear making a mistake and losing so much that it causes a loss later in the game. Interestingly, many of my slow-playing students don’t mind losing games later due to time trouble, which they brush away as a good excuse! “I played him even for 32 moves before it all fell apart!” is a common refrain. I think psychologists would call their reaction a type of defensive mechanism, which causes them to accept those losses more easily, which of course only reinforces the problem.
There are several actions a slow playing student can take to deal with this, and they roughly mimic the Alcoholics Anonymous steps:
• Admit you have a problem with playing too slowly.
• Resolve to do something about your problem.
• Learn things you can do to alleviate your problem.
• Make a proactive conscious effort to apply the things you learned in Step 3.
• Review your progress and continue to take proactive action until the problem is gone.
Let us now list some of the things you can do in Step 3 to speed up your game toward a normal pace:
• When playing over-the-board, record how many minutes you have left after each move; when playing online, look at your clock after each move.
• Ask yourself ‘Am I playing too slow or too fast?’ and adjust immediately to asymptotically get back on track (you often cannot do it in a move or two).
• Learn basic tactics better, recognizing most common safety issues more quickly and accurately (Tip #91).
• Learn the ideas in your openings and look up your openings after each game (See Tip #3).
• Learn Botvinnik’s Rule (Tip #153) and try to follow it rigorously every time there is a normal (not crazy) opening.
• Always play with an increment or time delay to avoid games with race conditions at the end.
• Don’t dilly with indecision between non-critical moves. Ask yourself, “Is the choice I have between these candidates likely to decide the game?” If the answer is “No”, then choose a move and play it, flipping a coin if you must. The best time to figure out if one non-critical move is better than another is in the post-game analysis, not during the game!
• If necessary, consult a ‘sports psychologist’ to get additional help in overcoming psychological issues that prevent you from playing at a normal speed. I hope it doesn’t come to that, but I had to list it.
These actions are not a panacea for slow play, but they form the basis for a possible cure. The real key is having the slow player resolve to take consistent action; we coaches can take the horse to water, but we can’t make them drink.
Tip 38
Losing on time is much worse than making bad moves.
Several years ago I played a series of 20 0 (20 minutes per game with no increment) games against an expert-level opponent. Being the better player, I often found myself in superior positions as time ran lower. For the sake of argument, let’s say we often reached a point where my winning chances were 60-70% and we both had two minutes remaining. But then something odd often happened.
My opponent, contrary to what most experts would do, refused to speed up to try to avoid losing on time. I, on the other hand, did speed up. What inevitably happened was that we would make several moves and I would still have over a minute left when my opponent lost on time. Therefore, I would duly claim the win, but then my opponent would make the unusual request: “Would you like to finish the game?”
Unusual because the game was over! During the past few moves my position would often deteriorate slightly as I speed up to avoid flagging while my opponent continued to play slowly. Let us assume my ‘final’ position, if the game were not over, would now be completely even. However, if we look at the ‘overall’ evaluation (properly taking time into consideration), as my position slightly deteriorated my chances of winning (and your willingness to bet on me!) would soar from 60-70% to 100% once my opponent had so little time that he could not checkmate me before his flag fell. While my expert opponent’s attitude is extremely unusual for players rated 2000+, it is much more common among weaker players, especially those who grew up playing without a clock.
As a long-time professional chess instructor my job is to help my students get better results. Over the years, several of them admitted that they would rather let their flag fall, even in equal or superior(!) positions, than hastily make ‘bad’ moves. While this is, in a weird way, somewhat admirable, it is also quite averse to their improvement goals, and often leads to stunting their chess growth.
Let us make the point further by examining the rule book. Basically, there are three main ways to lose a game: get checkmated, resign, or lose on time (when the opponent has mating material). All are scored equally: 0. It does not matter if you get Fool’s mated in the opening or last 100 moves, the loss is scored and rated the same. Similarly, if you lose on time, it is scored the same whether you were winning or about to be checkmated.
But there is actually a big difference in how important it is not to lose on time when you are in a good position as opposed to when your position is resignable anyway.
My wife does not really know how to play chess, but she can beat anyone who loses on time against her. What I am trying to say is that giving away a game is a lot different than trying your best and then having your opponent beat you.
If you are playing a good player and have a resignable position and lose on time in a vain attempt to find a move that might keep you in the game, you are not losing very much. From an expected value standpoint, you are going from a position where your expected number of points is close to zero to a situation (lost on time) with exactly zero.
But if you don’t have a losing position, then you are losing much more. For example, if you have a king and nine queens and your opponent has a king and a pawn (necessary mating material,) and you zone out and flag, you are basically losing an entire point (should have scored 1; got 0 = losing one point more than expected). This is twice as bad as stalemating someone with a king and queen vs king (expected score 1; actual score ½ = losing half a point).
Some players who suffer from losing on time claim “But I feel better if I have a good position and lose on time; if I make bad moves and lose I feel worse!” OK, let’s assume that their perception does hold for them. However, they are suffering under a misconception that somehow it is ‘better’ to have that good position and throw it 100% away in an instant by simply letting their clock fall than it is to suffer bad moves and possibly survive.
They are basically making an excuse, one that won’t just jeopardize their position (as bad moves do), but destroy their score. And on top of that, they learn much less when they let their clock fall; there’s nothing to be learned there. However, there are a ton of things you can learn if you consistently try to win games from good positions or draw them from equal ones, even (or especially) when short of time. You won’t always win, but you will try, learn, have some fun, and score at least some points.
The bottom line is that when you make moves you are human and will make mistakes. So will your opponent. If you play fast enough to not lose on time, sometimes you are going to throw away the win and get only a draw, and you may even lose. But if you lose on time, you will lose every time that happens, and even my wife could beat you (your opponent no longer makes mistakes when your flag falls). The only way to maximize your score – and thus rating – would be to try your best and make sure you never lose on time in non-losing positions (this should be possible if you have a time delay or increment). Make your opponent beat you. Don’t beat yourself.
Tip 39
Do not be afraid of online cheaters.
I run into several new students who don’t want to play over-the-board because they are still afraid of COVID, evil opponents, that players in the clubs and tournaments are too good, or whatever. But I also run into the opposite case of players who only want to play over-the-board because they are afraid of online cheaters (those that illegally use engines to find moves). I don’t find either viewpoint very convincing, but let’s address the latter one in this tip.
There are only a few cases, so let us consider each one:
• Suppose an opponent is using an engine to cheat on every move or even just enough moves to win every game. Then their rating should be about 3500 (give or take some, depending on the server, since ratings are relative and not absolute), and you would see their rating before the game and know they are not a suitable opponent.
• Suppose they are only cheating enough to make the game competitive, that could be viewed as beneficial. Why? Suppose a player who would normally play at an 1100 level cheats enough to get a rating of 1700. Then if you are rated 1700 and they use an engine to play like a 1700, you will win half the games against them when, without cheating, you would beat them almost all the time. But you would seek them out as a comparably rated opponent to yourself, so that would not make much difference from playing a real 1700.
• Finally, suppose they only cheat when the game is important or only against you and not everyone else (Why? Your guess is as good as mine!). This is the worst case, but it assumes that your game is important enough that they would throw in a rare cheat just for those important games. Obviously, this would not happen every game they play or we are back to the first bullet. In this case they may temporarily get away with some cheating in the short run, but online cheating detection at the main servers has improved dramatically in the past decade or so and, possibly with the help of your notification to the server, they won’t get away with it for long.
I believe I read somewhere that IM John Watson had written comparable arguments to mine as to why the average player should not worry about online cheaters.
If all this doesn’t convince you that you should not worry about online cheating, then you are missing a wonderful opportunity to play opponents of your choosing 24/7, and in many fine online events.
Chapter Two
Thought Process
This chapter deals primarily with the process – more than content – of chess thinking. Process involves which steps are being taken, their order, and priority. Thought process tips deal with areas like analysis, evaluation, and the important but commonly overlooked topic of time management. It also includes tips involving questions to ask during the thought process.#
Tip 40
There is not one single correct thought process that would cover all types of positions...
...unless you want it to include a ‘meta-thought process’ decision of what type of thought process would apply to the current position!
In his interesting book
Move First, Think Later: Sense and Nonsense in Improving Your Chess
, Willy Hendriks suggests that teaching someone to think by giving them instructions like “Do A first then do B” is not the way good players think, and by telling someone that you are likely doing more harm than good.
Hendriks’s opinion is comparable to what I am suggesting with this tip. For example, you certainly do not approach highly analytical and completely non-analytical positions the same. A good example of a non-analytical position might occur for Black’s move if White opens the game 1.a4.
Black to play after 1.a4 – What is his thought process?
In this and similar non-analytical (‘judgmental’) positions Black should not necessarily be thinking analytical ideas like ‘If I make move x, what will White do to me on the next move and how will I be able to meet that?’ Instead, he should be thinking in general terms like ‘What openings would make sense reversed with a pawn on a4 since I am effectively playing White?’ or ‘White is leaving the first thrust in the center up to me; how can I best take advantage of that?’
This latter type of thought process is ‘hand-waving’ (moving on principles and general observation, but not via detailed analysis), but in a very acceptable way. It is quite different to an analytical situation, for example, a complex position with many checks, captures, and threats for both sides. Then hand-waving is a serious mistake; you must be more analytical.
I agree with Hendriks that no strong player has a strict process they use every move and telling a student that they should have one can be counterproductive. But I will make a general observation from my experience:
The more advanced a player is, the more he can use intuition, judgment, and jump all around searching for what he wants to play; all the ingredients are there. The more a player is towards beginner, the more he needs at least some ingredients that get him off step one and systematically help him find moves that are at least safe.
For example, no one would tell an advanced reader to sound out ‘t’, ‘h’ and ‘e’ when reading the word ‘the’, but it is almost impossible to teach someone how to read English without first helping them recognize letters, their sounds, and how to combine those sounds into words before they can read for meaning, as all advanced readers do.
So, while it is true that teaching inexperienced players rigorous, structured thought processes can not only be unhelpful, but even counter-productive, the opposite extreme of telling them to just ‘go with the flow’ isn’t going to provide any basis for going forward if they don’t have the board vision and tactical vision to spot meaningful patterns to use in the game.
Instead, a practical middle-ground is possible where you can teach someone many of the basic precepts and principles of what needs, as a minimum, to be done at some point in their thought process. For example, you can teach someone to ask first about their opponent’s move ‘What are
all
the important things that move does?’ and ‘Is that move safe?’ and to ask about each of their own candidate moves, ‘Is it safe?’
It is true that if you are required to think about the process of what you should be thinking that can detract from what your thinking should be. But the other extreme (which I don’t think Hendriks is fully espousing) of giving an inexperienced player no guidance for fear of stifling their creativity or causing them to think too mechanically is probably also not optimum. As usual, the best solution probably lies somewhere in the middle.
Tip 41
There’s not always a clearly best move or idea, and assuming there is (outside of puzzles, which state a clear goal) might be counterproductive.
In the previous tip I suggested that
there’s not always one single correct thought process that covers all situations (positions; time control issues), and I will also deal with circumstances when a player states “I reach positions where I don’t know what to do” (Tip #46). But there is a third key ‘don’t know’ issue: in many positions there is no single correct move or plan, so those looking for a clear best move won’t find one.
In his wide-ranging book
Chess for Zebras
, GM Rowson has a chapter called ‘Psycho-Logics’ and, within that chapter there is a section ‘The Importance of Not Having a Clue’ where he makes a statement in bold which I would like to repeat: “The stronger a player is, the more likely he is to begin by saying ‘I don’t know’ when you ask him what is happening in a position!”
There are several reasons for this, but one is that many positions contain several issues and factors (imbalances, to use the IM Silman term) that could be dealt with by a variety of logical/reasonable moves and ideas. Sometimes the best idea requires a specific move order or plan (most likely in a combination or in the endgame), but other times the position is much more fluid and a variety of moves and plans might all be reasonable. The key is that to assume
a priori
that there is always only one right move and plan is a falsehood that will make your thought process and analysis, not to mention your ability to finally decide on a move, much more difficult.
In the middlegame, if the position is objectively equal, there may be a variety of moves that will keep it about equal. In an endgame which is drawn, there may be multiple paths (with possibly more than one initial move) to achieving that draw. If you give a position to a computer engine, and ask it to display the top several moves and these moves end up separated by about a tenth of a pawn or less, it is likely that any of them are reasonable and, in most senses, equally good. So, in these situations, if you don’t know what to do and end up picking any of these moves, that’s quite OK, despite what doing lots of ‘Solitaire Chess’ (where you are often asked to find the ‘right’ moves and are penalized if you don’t) may lead you to believe.
Here is an example. On several moves in the opening (shown after Black’s 7th move) my student, rated 1206 and White, had trouble figuring out what to do against their 1339-rated opponent:
White to play
At the time this game was played I gave this position to an engine and let it show the top six moves. At 22 ply there was about a 0.15 pawn difference between the top move and the sixth move, and it stayed that way for most of the opening.
In all the lines presented by the engine, White eventually got his kingside pieces out and, despite Black’s menacing pawn storm, often castled that side. But that is not the point. The point was that on most moves White had a choice of several ideas and continuations that were reasonable and led to a slight advantage. In lines where Black played ...Bxc3+; bxc3 and gave up the bishop-pair, then White eventually playing c4xd5 to undouble the pawns and open the position for the bishops was usually best and logical, but even that was not absolutely necessary. This is not at all surprising for a ‘normal’ opening position where there are not many threats and several pieces left to activate.
In these types of ‘non-critical’ positions, for me to suggest to a student that he did not find my (or ‘the right’) idea would be to send the wrong message. This student wanted me to teach him how to find that right move in this opening, but I had to admit that if he just kept developing his pieces and did it reasonably without wasting time, there were many ways to skin this cat.
Puzzles often psychologically prepare us to find only those ‘best’ moves and sometimes in games your
criticality assessment
tells you that you must do exactly that. However, it is important to understand that sometimes looking for the exact right move (or plan) will not only waste time, but could be a futile effort since ‘any among equals’ in many cases might be a more reasonable goal.
Tip 42
More than anything, your ability to analyze and evaluate positions determines your playing strength. Therefore, strengthening those does more than anything else to help you improve.
In Tip #24, we did a thought experiment about swallowing a pill to help you learn openings. That idea applies to this tip as well, in spades.
Why is it that when one attends tournaments, it is likely you can see an 11-year-old rated 2000 beating 40-year-olds rated 1600 who have a lot more experience and, presumably a lot more chess knowledge?
The answer is easy; if chess were all about accumulating knowledge, then as you get older and read more books or watch more videos, you would just get better and better, and 11-year-olds would rarely beat experienced 40-year-olds. But chess is not mostly knowledge. It is mostly skills like analysis, evaluation, time management, stamina, perseverance, ability to learn from losses, ability to take instruction, open-mindedness, concentration, and a few others.
As a refresher, a quick definition of:
Analysis – the part of the thought process that attempts to find the candidate moves for both players, the famous ‘If I go there and he goes there, what would I do?’ type of thinking.
Evaluation – determining in a position who stands better, how much better, and why. Evaluation is usually done at the end of analysis when the position becomes quiescent (no more pertinent checks, captures, or threats which could likely change the evaluation of the quiescent position).
In most positions outside the opening and deep endgame, a player is not dealing solely with memory. It is true that knowledge of how to play similar positions plays a big part in analysis, but it is just a part. A player’s ability to analyze an unfamiliar position, to generate candidate moves for both sides, and then determine likely sequences and then evaluate them to choose the best move possible is the core of anyone’s playing strength.
Therefore, in order to truly improve, a player not only has to acquire more chess knowledge, but also work on improving those skills.
Tip 43
*Top-10 Tip*
There is more than one way to play better moves.
One of my YouTube videos won the award for ‘Best Instruction’ by the Chess Journalists of America when I addressed this obvious, but little-discussed fact. In order to become a better player, you must make better moves than you did before, but there is more than one way you can do this! The main ways are:
• Analyze more accurately (skill).
• Evaluate resulting positions better (skill).
• Memorize more opening and endgame patterns/sequences (knowledge).
• Learn more tactical patterns/sequences (knowledge).
• Learn more principles and how to apply them better (knowledge).
• Become more consistent in thought process (skill).
• Manage your time better (skill).
I would call the first two bullets above ‘finding’ better moves, as opposed to knowing them. When I discussed in the video that playing better moves often means you cannot just memorize more openings and endgames, but rather that you must be able to ‘find’ better moves, I was criticized by a viewer or two that I was just playing semantics. I respect everyone’s opinion, but I think they missed the point.
In Tip #14 I told the story of a player who had been improving steadily up to about 1500 just with the paradigm of accumulating more chess knowledge. But then he started to realize that he would begin to get diminishing returns on his chess work if he did not start learning how to analyze and evaluate positions better. I complimented him on his insight, but I fear that many others are stuck forever in the ‘I have to memorize more stuff to become a titled player’ mindset.
On the day I wrote this page, GM Noel Studer tweeted: “The most important skill in chess improvement: consistency. Be consistent in your training and you will improve. Be consistent during the game and you will pick up many points...” I replied:
“You are correct about the importance of consistency. If you play like a 1600 for 39 moves and then like a 700 for one, your playing strength is a lot lower than the average (mean) of the moves: ((1600x39)+(1x700))/40.”
Tip 44
One of the most common causes of thought process errors among amateurs rated under 1800 is quiescent errors.
My bet is that you can find White’s best move in this diagram:
White to play
What do you think is the average rating of players that might make a quiescent error and think ‘I can’t play 1.Qe8+ because I will lose my queen to 1...Rxe8’? Possibly about 700 or below? Almost no one with any experience would miss this either in a game, or especially in a puzzle if we change this to ‘White to play and win’ or even easier, ‘White to play and mate in two’.
So, what is a quiescence error?
Quiescence error: A common thought process error made (mostly by lower-rated players) where a player stops analyzing and evaluates a position as ‘quiet’ when there are still further forcing moves (Tips #63 and #93) which would likely (or will) change that evaluation.
From teaching over 1,000 players private one-to-one and discussing the causes of their mistakes and hearing them think out loud, I can say for certain that quiescence errors are not only one of the main causes of amateur errors, but they also answer their common question “Why is it that I do so well in puzzles, but I miss those same continuations in my games?”
When someone holds up a sign (puzzle requirement) “White to play and win” then players don’t stop looking until they find it. In games, lower rated players often stop as soon as they see possible material loss, superficially thinking a move is not safe.
Let’s consider a more typical example using a problem from John Bain’s
Chess Tactics for Students
:
White to play and win
Solution:
1.Rxe7!
and if
1...Kxe7
(1...c6!? 2.Rxb7! cxb5 3.Rb8+ Ke7 4.Bb4+ wins the rook)
2.Bb4+
not only skewers the black king and rook, but the black king has no squares to guard the rook, so it is also a type of removal of the guard.
This puzzle is also an excellent example of the type that players under 1800 FIDE often miss in games since 1.Rxe7 is not superficially safe (it loses the exchange – a rook for a bishop or knight) and they reject this candidate move, making a quiescence error.
Strong players rarely make basic quiescence errors because they don’t simply think “I can’t play move X because it isn’t safe”, but rather “If I play move x and give up material are there further moves (almost always forcing moves: checks, captures, or threats) which would indicate that further analysis is suggested which possibly could change my initial evaluation?
In this case 1.Rxe7 Kxe7 is not quiet. The check 2.Bb4+ initiates a skewer indicating that White may regain his material or even more, and thus White should not stop, but instead continue to analyze to get a more accurate evaluation of 1.Rxe7.
In puzzles, players rated 1000-1800 usually get these solutions correctly because of the sign next to the position that says “White to play and win”. That tells them that something is there and they should not stop looking until they find it. So when doing a puzzle like this, they are much more likely to think ‘If I play 1.Rxe7 and Black captures 1...Kxe7 and wins the exchange, is there something there that might actually be the solution to the puzzle even though 1.Rxe7 is not a safe move?’
That type of thought process will be adequate for puzzles with a defined requirement or goal, but in a game they are much more likely to superficially reject moves like 1.Rxe7 because they lose material, despite doing puzzles of analogous positions which indicate these types of moves often require further investigation.
I have given the following puzzle to hundreds of my students. I start with the question: “Black is threatening 1...Bxh4. What are all the moves that might not just lose the knight?” The main three answer are 1.Nf3, 1.Nf5, and 1.g5. Then I ask, “List these three moves in order of safety,” so I ask the reader to do that also:
List 1.
N
f3, 1.
N
f5 and 1.g5 in order of safety
By far the most common answer is 1.Nf3 is the safest, 1.g5 is second,
and 1.Nf5 is third because it clearly loses a pawn.
But then I tell students that 1.Nf3 is the least safe(!), and ask them: why? With that new information, it is now more like a puzzle because I have given them a defined goal, and many finally realize 1.Nf3? loses a piece to 1...Rxf3! and if 2.Kxf3? Ne5+ wins the queen! When I quiz them on why they thought 1.Nf3 was safe, about 70% admit they simply stopped after 1...Rxf3 2.Kxf3 as losing material, making a quiescence error. But if you want to be a good player, you need to be able to recognize that a move like 1.Nf3? is not safe.
Final note: When I first saw this position in a student game, I said immediately that 1.Nf3 was not safe! How? Because the only possible capture of the moving knight, 1...Rxf3, was the first candidate I considered (no quiescence error!), and then immediately I saw the fork (tactical vision!) if the only recapture, 2.Kxf3, was attempted.
Tip 45
You are not trying to prove how good your move is; you are trying to prove it is better than other moves.
What is your goal each move? Think about this question and answer before you read the next paragraph.
Your goal each move is to play the best move you can in a reasonable amount of time.
There are exceptions: if you are winning easily, your goal is to play a move that preserves the easy win, again in a reasonable amount of time. You don’t need the best move you can because if your move wins easily, you can’t do much better.
If you are losing badly, you want moves that might give your opponent a chance to go wrong and let you back in the game. Those might not theoretically be the engine’s ‘highest scoring’ moves, but from a practical sense, they are the moves that give you the best chance.
However, in most competitive positions, you want to play the best move you can. But determining “best” requires comparison – you can’t determine if something is best unless you know what set you are comparing, and then doing the comparisons.
In the seminal work by de Groot on how players think,
Thought and Choice in Chess
, world champion Dr. Max Euwe finishes his analysis of de Groot position ‘A’ this way:
“1.Bxd5 exd5 looks bad for Black. Probably some more accidents will happen. Much is still up in the air. One plays, for instance, 2.Qf3. Defending the knight on f6 is not so easy; 2...Kg7 looks very unpleasant...Yes, I play 1.Bxd5”.
There is a much uncertainly in that paragraph: “looks bad”, “Probably”, “up in the air”, “not so easy” and “looks unpleasant”! If you were able to go back in time to just after the exercise and asked Dr. Euwe if he thought White was winning, he would probably say something like “I don’t know; it looks pretty good.” But then if you pressed him by asking why he did not analyze further (he certainly could have continued to analyze more deeply), he might have said “My clock was running and Dr. de Groot asked me to think like I would in a game. I think I have determined that 1.Bxd5 is the best move, so I finished thinking and selected that move.”
In other words, once a player has proven that a move is better than all the alternatives, it rarely matters exactly how good it is! Trying to determine exactly how much better is often just a waste of time. When I was an improving player I once lost a game primarily because I spend so much time trying to figure out how good my best move was that I got confused and did not play it, and instead got mated! I resolved never to do that again; once I have shown what the best move is, my only other action would be to confirm that conclusion and then play that move. Spending time doing things like trying to figure out exactly how good the best move is in that case was even worse than just a waste of time.
De Groot called one of the final aspects of the thought process ‘Striving for Proof”. What is a good player trying to prove? He/she is trying to prove that the move he is about to play is at least as good, if not better, than the alternatives.
I also wrote a book about players doing de Groot exercises,
The Improving Chess Thinker
. I can state that one of the many differences between lower-rated players and higher-rated ones is that the lower-rated jump around until they find a move they like and then try to convince themselves it is as good as they think it is. They don’t do many comparisons of positions that occur after specific sequences between the top candidate moves. But stronger players analyze specific sequences they think may occur and then compare the evaluations of the resultant positions.
This is another way of saying strong players are trying to prove which move they are analyzing is the best move by making comparisons, while weaker players much more rarely analyze specific sequences and, even when they do, are much less likely to compare evaluations between likely sequences.
It is often irrelevant to determine exactly how much better the best candidate move is than the alternatives, especially before the endgame (where evaluations are often win/draw/lose). Once you know a move is at least as good as any other possible candidates, that’s almost always sufficient reason for taking some time to confirm your decision and then making the move.
Tip 46
Not knowing what to do in a position can be good! It is not knowing how to figure out what might be done which is usually bad.
Students often say to me, “I reached this position and I did not know what to do!” and they are almost always surprised when I reply “That can be good!” Why would I say that?
Let us consider this from the opposite view: suppose you were playing a game where you always knew what to do on every move/decision. We have such games, such as Tic-Tac-Toe. I can give you a short Tic-Tac-Toe lesson and you will always know what to do, and you will never lose. Is that fun? Is that challenging? How many professional Tic-Tac-Toe coaches or authors do you know? What makes the game fun is that you sometimes, if not often, do not know what to do, and have the challenge of trying to figure it out!
Now for the bad news: there is a big difference between not knowing what to do (acceptable), and not being able to figure out what might be done, and then differentiating between the alternatives (usually unacceptable).
Having stated that, there are some types of positions, often ones that are resignable or at least clearly lost, where there is nothing to be done. Looking for a saving move or idea in a position where your opponent dominates the entire board and has you in a bind may be a futile effort.
Let us assume that you are in a position where there is something to be done, but you do not know what it is. Chess authors write entire books about strategy and planning and finding combinations, so I will not be able to summarize them in a tip! But the more you know about these things, by reading many annotated game books, doing puzzles of all types, and reviewing games with strong players, the more likely you will have some idea what to do.
Sometimes it is as easy as systematically searching both sides forcing moves: checks, captures, and threats. If some of these click, it may be possible to initiate a tactic or, more likely, prevent one.
Another basic idea, popularized – but certainly not invented! – by IM Jeremy Silman in his book
How To Reassess Your Chess
(4th edition) is to examine the imbalances in the position. These are strengths and weaknesses of the position that one side has that the other does not, hence the imbalance. Learning how to ‘read’ imbalances and try to take advantage of them is another strong indicator of ‘what to do’. Finally, Silman says
for a plan to be strongly considered, it must be both feasible (doable) and effective
.
Tip 47
The language you use when you think can greatly affect your decisions.
When I listen to students think out loud, it strikes me that sometimes they either do not know the nomenclature, misuse it or, even worse, use it in such a way that it negatively affects their decisions. For example, if a player thinks trading queens is bad because he/she doesn’t want to “lose their queen” then they will rarely trade queens correctly because they gave it a negative connotation by using the word ‘lose’.
Players know that backward pawns are a detriment, but most of my lower-rated students have little idea what a backward pawn is, often thinking the ‘back’ pawn in a pawn chain is the definition. Therefore, they often evaluate the rear pawn in a pawn chain as weak even when it is a very strong pawn!
Even if players use a term correctly, the connotation of the term may strongly influence them. Most beginners learn early in their development that doubled pawns are bad, but they have no idea in which positions doubled pawns are a significant factor, so I often hear analysis something like “If I do x and he captures, when I recapture that gives me doubled pawns so I can’t do that...” There’s the problem: ‘they can’t do that’ no matter how good it is for them because it gives them – horror! –
doubled pawns!
True story: I once had a student who had to make a recapture. He had two possibilities: one lost a pawn and the other gave him an isolated pawn (another no-no!). When analyzing the recapture, I automatically assumed he made the move which did not lose a pawn, when he corrected me and told me he recaptured the other way. When I protested that his way of capturing lost a pawn, he replied “Yes, but the other way gets an isolated pawn and I did not want to do that, so I recaptured that way.” In other words, he valued isolating a pawn as worse than losing a pawn! This is not exactly a problem with nomenclature, but he attributed to the term ‘isolated pawn’ a very large negative implication.
A semantic problem comparable to the ‘back’ vs ‘backward; confusion would be my reaction to ‘Think defense first’ when a player is way ahead on material, which is often misinterpreted as ‘Play defensively’. That is incorrect for at least two reasons:
• ‘Think defense first’ is about ordering your thinking; ‘play defensively’ is about the style your moves should reflect.
• ‘Think defense first’ suggests first considering moves that stop something the opponent might do (e.g. a threat), and still possibly maintaining an aggressive/offensive posture, while ‘play defensively’ is often synonymous with ‘play passively’ which is not at all what I would suggest for someone who correctly thinks defense first.
A player may think the word ‘attack’ only means ‘attack the king’ when it could mean any kind of aggressive maneuver, anywhere on the board. Or a player might think an ‘outpost’ could be occupied by a pawn, or perhaps be on their side of the board.
Another common beginner misconception is that an open file cannot have anything on it, rather than just the absence of pawns. Or they might think a ‘bad bishop’ is one that is blocked by other mobile pieces, such as a white bishop on g2 being blocked by a white knight on f3.
These type of phrase misconceptions often lead to misguided analysis and evaluation. Players who go to chess clubs and talk with other players (Tip #81) are more likely to get over these misconceptions more quickly than those that only play online and rarely converse with other players.
Tip 48
When your opponent is thinking, you can do your time management, general strategy, and maybe take a brief walk to stretch. If you think you have a very good idea of what he/she might play, then start analyzing what you would do on the next move.
I often get asked, “What’s the best way to use your opponent’s thinking time?” Good question; after all, if both sides have good time management, about half your chess playing time will be when your opponent is thinking.
So, while the issue of time management is still in our thoughts, that is one of the first things you can do when your opponent is thinking: check your time management. When I play in over-the-board events and make a move, that consists of at least four automatic things:
• Move the piece.
• Press the clock.
• Record (not notate!) the move.
• Record how many minutes I have remaining.
It follows that my next step is to compare my time to the required time control information (e.g. if I must make a specific number of moves before another time control) and ask myself, “Am I playing too fast or too slow?” Once I can guesstimate that information, my next step would be to understand that if I am playing too fast or too slow, I need to adjust my time management asymptotically to get back on track.
I once heard the suggestion ‘On your time you do the specific analysis of your moves; on your opponent’s time you can do your general strategic planning.’ I think this is good advice, although it is a little over-simplified. For example, take the case where your opponent has a virtually forced move, but for whatever reason is taking time to make it. In that case, it makes sense to double check to make sure that move is really forced for him/her and, if so, then assume that move and start analyzing on their time exactly what you would do. But, unless you are in time trouble, when priorities change greatly, (*Tip Alert!*)
don’t just make your move quickly even if you had been thinking about that move on their time
– that’s a common mistake that often leads to hasty errors.
I also get asked if you should start calculating your move even if the opponent’s move is not forced. While this is not impossible, it is inefficient in the sense that you are just guessing what they are going to do. If you have absolutely nothing else constructive you can do at that moment – like even take a mental break! (Tip #31) – then sure, you can guess and calculate. I don’t often do this, but I don’t think it would be correct to indicate that I almost never do.
Besides time management, strategic planning, and analyzing potential replies, what else can be done on the opponent’s time? Obviously, any logistic concerns can be covered such as getting up and stretching, getting some water, having a quiet snack, a restroom break, or anything you would not want to do when your clock is running.
I am not like everyone else, but I often found it helpful to not only get up and stretch whenever my opponent had a long think, but to get my mind completely off the game and see how the games of some of my nearby friends and colleagues were doing. I found it relaxing to not only walk, but see what I might do on some of the other boards – like following the plot of several streaming television shows, except the intrigue was on other boards, not on a screen, and I was starring in one of the shows!
In this situation, when someone is walking around when their opponent is thinking, it is their responsibility to become aware when the opponent has moved and they should return to their board. One of the most common forms of ‘inadvertent’ cheating is to help someone by telling them “Your opponent just moved; your clock is running.” I see this occasionally and, as a former senior tournament director, I try to kindly advise the informer that they really should not be helping the wanderer this way – getting them back to their board two minutes sooner might have a large effect on the outcome of the game.
Obviously, all of the above is greatly affected by the time control and how much time your opponent is taking on a move. If the time control is fairly short then, by the time you check your time management, your opponent may already be moving. In these shorter time controls it is much more dangerous to wander around and look at other games like I did with very slow time controls. It would not be unreasonable to sit for the entire hour for a 30 5 game, while for most players, it would be almost impossible – and unhealthy – to sit the entire four hours in a time control like 40 moves in two hours.
In summary, analyzing the position as if it were your move during your opponent’s thinking time is sometimes beneficial, but often inefficient and gets diminishing returns. But if there is nothing else helpful to be done (like take a mental break!), then obviously it sometimes can be helpful. The shorter the time control, the more you are going to be analyzing during your opponent’s move, just out of momentum and necessity.
Tip 49
There are three ways to keep track of material during a series of exchanges (trades); use one method carefully and then, if necessary, verify with another method, to help ensure you get the accurate answer.
The three methods to keep track (‘count’) material during a sequence of exchanges are:
i. What’s left on the board at the end of exchanges compared to the start?
ii. A ‘running count’ (after each capture).
iii. How much material was captured by each player during the sequence of captures?
I was playing in my fourth tournament (my first with a rating!), and I had a series of captures on the f2-square. I counted and determined I would win the exchange (a rook for a bishop or knight), but when I actually played the moves on the board I lost two pieces for a rook! That cost me the game. I was so upset with myself that I vowed that would never happen again in a slow game where I had enough time to verify my count. It never has, partially thanks to this tip.
Let us try all three methods to see if 1) White wins material when capturing on f7 and 2) all methods give the same result (they should!):
White to play
White calculates
1.Nxf7 Rxf7
(if Black does not recapture then White is probably at least ahead a pawn, so the critical line is to assume what happens if Black does capture)
2.Bxf7+
(this is not forced, since the rook is pinned so White could try to apply more pressure but, assuming he captures right away, what is the consequence?)
2...Qxf7 3.Qxf7+
(again, White could stop and not capture, but the trade of queens should not change the bottom line)
3...Kxf7
.
Method 1: At the start the material was even. At the end Black has two extra pieces (and the advantage of the bishop-pair), and White has an extra rook and pawn. By the Reinfeld valuation system (1-3-3-5-9; Tip #98) the final position is even, but by more sophisticated systems these trades are a big advantage to Black.
Method 2: Running count: 1.Nxf7 (White is ahead a pawn) 1...Rxf7 (Black is ahead a knight for a pawn) 2.Bxf7+ (White is ahead a rook and pawn for a knight) 2...Qxf7 (Black has a knight and bishop for a rook and pawn) 3.Qxf7+ (White has a queen, rook, and pawn for a bishop and knight) 3...Kxf7 (Black has a knight and bishop for a rook and pawn, which is the same answer as method #1).
Method 3: During the trades, White captured a queen, and rook and a pawn. Black captured a queen, knight and bishop (notice how in call cases the queen trade cancels out, making the remaining calculation easier). So White gave up a knight and bishop and got a rook and pawn (the same answer as methods #1 and #2)
When you are playing and there is a difficult ‘counting’ problem with multiple exchanges, it makes sense to not only count it multiple times to make sure they agree – if they do not, more trials are required until they do – but also to use more than one method as an additional double-check on your answer. The entire game is often riding on making sure you count correctly!
Tip 50
You can’t play what you don’t see.
This is one of my favorite Danisms – idioms/principles I have made up to describe situations often met while instructing aspiring players. It has several reasonable interpretations:
• When visualizing sequences during analysis, if you don’t see a move is possible/legal, it won’t be a candidate move. Moreover, if you are analyzing deeply and can’t visualize well, you can’t analyze well.
• When developing candidate moves, if you don’t consider a move to be reasonable or don’t even consider it at all, it can’t become a candidate move.
• If a move isn’t seen as a candidate, you can’t analyze it, much less play it.
Quite often an engine (or a grandmaster) will play a move that I would not have identified as a candidate. In the following student game, what moves would you consider for White?
White to play
In this position, at 37(!) ply,
Stockfish
’s top candidate is 19.Ra1(!). I must admit, this move would not register with me. Yes, I need to develop the king’s rook, but to the a-file? For a move to be a one of my candidates, it needs to ‘do’ something that I can understand. But what does 19.Ra1 do? The file is closed and pushing the a-pawn might vaguely make sense once the b-pawn is guarded, but is that something that my eye was drawn toward? Not at all.
Occasionally when a student shows me a game in a lesson, they will play a move I don’t consider a candidate. I often reply with the bewildered “I don’t understand that move; what does it do?” Later in the same game as in the previous example, it was White’s move:
White to play
Here White played the surprising
26.Ke1?!
.
I could readily see 26.Ke2 as a candidate, but what does 26.Ke1 do that the more active 26.Ke2 doesn’t? There are no tactical dangers with the king on e2. So I would not have listed 26.Ke1 among my candidates since 26.Ke2 ‘dominates’ 26.Ke1. I would have trouble seeing 26.Ke1.
Former World Correspondence Champion and insightful author Cecil Purdy said,
“
Look wide before you look deep
.”
In other words, when playing long time control games, you can often start the search part of your thought process with the question: ‘What are all (wide!) the things both sides are trying to do?’ That should lead to the follow-up, ‘What are all (wide!) the reasonable moves I therefore might consider?’
That is a good way to augment seeing more possibilities early in the thought process!
Tip 51
Invisible Moves are those that are harder for (weaker) players to see, because they filter them out due to initial safety factors (quiescence errors) or they involve pieces moving in less conventional ways
.
Here are examples of the types of moves that are often overlooked or filtered out:
• Sneaky pins, which utilize squares that pinned pieces are not actually guarding (Tip #105).
• Castling in the endgame when it is assumed castling is no longer legal.
• Moving a piece to a square where a less valuable pieces could capture it.
• Moving a piece in a less common way, such as en passant, ‘long’ moves, attacking with the king early in the game, knight retreats, retracting the previous move, or moving the king away from the action in the endgame.
The following problem by Kubbel is a mate in one!
White to play and mate in one
The author uses several of the above-mentioned ideas to both create false leads, and also to make the correct solution more difficult to spot. The solution is: 1.Qa3#.
The following interesting position was given to me by a student, and I have used it for many de Groot ‘think out loud’ exercises. What would you play?
White to play
One ‘invisible’ candidate move for White is 1.Qf7. Most weaker players filter out this move due to the queen being placed
en prise and never consider it. A couple of intermediates spotted it and thought it had to be good, just because it is tricky (a very dangerous assumption!). But is it even good, much less best? I will leave that as a fun exercise for the reader. For a full analysis of this position, check out IM Greg Shahade’s instructive protocol at the end of Chapter 8 in my book
The Improving Chess Thinker
.
Several years ago, I wrote an original column about why players often miss moves like this, which I titled
Filter and Masks
. Later I made a similar YouTube video on this subject.
Filter and Masks
won a Chess Journalists of America
honorable
mention
award for Best Instruction. I think ‘filters’ help explain why amateur players make the common thought process error called quiescence errors, where they stop their analysis too soon and miss potentially important sequences that can dramatically change the evaluation (See Tip #44).
Tip 52
In highly analytical positions, analyze carefully. If you instead decide to move on general considerations or principles, I call that a ‘hand-waving’ error.
I have tested over a thousand students thinking ‘out loud’ and many, if not most, of lower-rated players are guilty of ‘hand-waving’ in some analytical positions, making their decisions based on generalities and principles, not specific analysis. There are a variety of reasons for this problem. They either:
• Play chess mostly by pattern recognition and never learned how to analyze.
• Don’t visualize very well, so they avoid serious analysis where visualization is required.
• Get so infatuated by an idea that they move solely on that idea, without regard to the analysis of whether that idea actually works or not.
There might be a position where I am thinking specific lines like ‘If I go 1.Bg5 and he responds with 1...Rfd8 and I then try 2.Rd3, I am not sure how I can best meet the pawn-break ...c5. So possibly I want to control the c-file first with 1.Rac1 and only then try 2.Bg5. If he responds with 1...b6 then something like 2.Ba4 could cause him problems.’ In such positions, lower-rated students instead think ‘more general’ things such as:
‘I want to attack kingside so maybe I should get a rook over there. But I am worried he might bring his queen out, so maybe I should bring my queen out first. My knight would like to get to the outpost on d5, but then he can attack kingside. The f-file is open so I can’t put my king there. A move like Qf2 looks interesting, or maybe my queen should go to g3. Yes, I like Qg3.’
The above was a generic example, but the following position, from a student game, is an excellent example of hand-waving from actual play:
White to play
White only has two legal moves, so that reduces the potential amount of analysis needed. However, my student, as he explained to me after the game, didn’t analyze much at all. Instead he moved on the following reasoning (I paraphrase):
“I am already ahead a bishop and two pawns, and I am threatening his queen twice. If I capture his rook (1.Kxh2) I am exposing my king to a bunch of checks like 1...Rh8+ and 1...Qh4+. But if I just tuck my king into g1 (1.Kg1), then my king is not nearly as exposed and I am far enough ahead on material to win. Moreover, I only have 17 minutes left on my clock (with a 45-second increment) so I don’t want to spend a lot of time analyzing because I am not very good in time pressure.”
An excellent hand-wave example (note: the well-known master ‘Coach Andras’, Andras Toth, calls this “story-telling” – there is no commonly accepted term yet in the chess world for this type of thought process error), but unfortunately, a little concrete analysis does not come close to backing up the student’s conclusion. In the game after
1.Kg1?? Qh4
threatening 2...Rh1#, White realized 2.Qxf7+ Kh6 did not help and played
2.Qh3
, but after
2...Rxh3 3.gxh3 Qg3+ 4.Kh1 Rh8
he had to resign.
Instead, 1.Kxh2 wins as after 1...Rh8+ 2.Kg1 Qh4 (or 1...Qh4+ 2.Kg1 Rh8, transposing) Black is not even threatening very much. White can play 3.Qxf7+ Kh6 with no problems for White. If 1...Qxd6+ 2.Kg1 Qd4+ 3.Rf2 also poses no problems.
When I asked my student if he thought he could calculate most of this in a reasonable amount of time, he thought he could not; he thought it might take him 10 minutes. When I asked him if he could beat a comparable opponent ahead a rook and a bishop with, say, seven minutes left and a 45-second increment on each move, he still expressed his doubts! That’s unfortunate, but hopefully most readers can complete a win when ahead large amounts of material with the aid of a big increment to ensure adequate time to make safe moves.
In
The Improving Chess Thinker
I showed several examples of players’ thought processes at all classes from below 1000 to International Master. One conclusion was that in analytical positions (complications and/or forcing moves possible)
higher-rated players think in very specific move sequences while lower-rated players often ‘hand-wave’ much more general analysis
.
Part, but not all, of the reason for this hand-waving is that lower-rated players have rarely practiced extensive visualization, so this basic analytical skill is under-developed. It only makes sense that if you can’t easily visualize four ply (two moves) ahead, you would tend to shy away from trying to analyze two moves ahead. When I ask students to describe where all the pieces are two moves ahead, even though only a maximum of four pieces have moved (excluding captures and castling), lower-rated students often describe the experience as being “fuzzy” – they lose track of which pieces have moved, which have not, and where the moved pieces have arrived (Tip #12).
There is no great fast fix for lack of visualization. Many just give up and say they lack the skill to visualize better, but it is not a ‘can do perfectly’ versus ‘can’t do at all’ issue. Although with visualization practice may not make perfect, practice does make one better. But to practice deeper visualization in a game requires two things: first, a slow enough time limit that on each move a player has time to look at various alternative candidate moves and likely sequences, and secondly a willingness of the player to practice a skill that initially they are not very proficient, and may thus be a source of frustration.
It is not a coincidence that my students who started playing chess online during the pandemic, maybe spurred by the Netflix show
The Queen’s Gambit
, think that 10 or 15 minute games are ‘slow’ games and thus never have a good opportunity to practice visualization. This leads them to get into bad thought process habits, much less fewer opportunities to practice
When you see a good move, don’t play it; look for a better one.
For this reason I have written a column and made a YouTube video, each with the title
Intermediate Time Controls Can Hinder Improvement
(Tip #34).
During lessons I try to encourage my lower-rated students to think in specific move sequences whenever possible and necessary. It is quite acceptable to ‘hand-wave’ your thinking on move 1 if you are Black, your opponent has played 1.a4, and you have no ‘book’ reply to that rare move. In that case there are no dangerous forcing moves (checks, captures or threats) that your opponent could reply on move 2, so using primarily generalities and principles will not get you into trouble (Tip #40).
But if there are possible dangerous forcing moves in reply to your candidate moves, there is little substitute for ‘doing the work’ and asking if a specific sequence is safe. For example, in some analytical position if you have a candidate move 1.Bg5, you have to take time and ask if you should play that, how would you meet replies like 1...Qa5+ or 1...h6, hitting the bishop, or 1...d4, attempting to fork your knight and rook. If you don’t attempt to find these specific dangers and assume that after each one of those you have at least a safe reply on your next move, I call that ‘Hope Chess’ because if you make the move without checking for danger and then the opponent does make a forcing move you did not anticipate, you think ‘Uh-oh’ and hope you have a safe reply.
Doing that specific analysis and not hand-waving (and thus just waiting to see what will happen, even if it is an unstoppable threat) requires at least some visualization, some available clock time, and the willingness and ability to find both potentially dangerous replies for your opponent and a way to safely meet each reply next move. At the very least, this specific ‘checking to see if each candidate move is safe’ will put you on the road to better visualization, less hand-waving, and finding safe and superior moves.
Tip 53
*Top-10 Tip*
In a slow game, when you reach a branch in analysis with multiple reasonable moves, first list all the reasonable moves, then prioritize how you want to analyze the list, then finally start analyzing the first prioritized move.
One mistake I see all the time when I ask my lower-rated students to analyze ‘out loud’ is that they come to a position (with either player to move) and they don’t consider what all the possible candidate moves are; they just ‘assume’ one and start analyzing it. Not considering all the reasonable alternatives is in direct conflict with Cecil Purdy’s famous advice “Look wide before you look deep.”
Sometimes the thought process error of just assuming one move can result in an adequate assessment, but much more often it can lead to big mistakes and wrong evaluations. The evaluation ends up wrong because the player has assumed a move that turns out to be clearly not best, which lowers the evaluation for the side making the assumed non-optimal move.
Here is an example I have given hundreds of students, with the goal of helping them learn more efficient analysis skills:
White to move
The question I ask students to consider is “Is 1.Nxe5 safe?”
Because of the obvious possible pin on the e-file, most students properly first notice that in deciding whether 1.Nxe5 is safe, they have to consider the reply 1...Qe7. But it is at this point where they go wrong. Instead of asking ‘If I play 1.Nxe5, what are all the moves (possibly in addition to the already noticed 1...Qe7) that Black might play that could possibly make 1.Nxe5 unsafe?’, most lower-rated players (roughly below 1500 FIDE) just assume that 1...Qe7 is the only move to investigate (Tip #54), and they start analyzing 1...Qe7 for a period of time. Then if they find that 1...Qe7 can be safely met by White with a move like 2.Qe2 or 2.f4 or sometimes they notice 2.0-0 (but 2.Bf4 runs into 2...g5!), they conclude that 1.Nxe5 must be safe.
Imagine their surprise when I ask them to play it, and I throw in 1...Qa5+, winning the knight!
This error sparks a discussion on how to deal with nodes of analysis where branches occur (such as the options White needs to identify Black having on his first move to try to refute 1.Nxe5).
The first step should be to make a list of dangerous moves (almost always checks, captures, or threats) that might make 1.Nxe5 unsafe. If you want to start the list with the noticed 1...Qe7, great. But instead of analyzing it, first complete the list – which obviously should also include 1...Qa5+.
Secondly, prioritize the list to see which move you want to analyze first. The first candidate to analyze should be the one most likely to refute 1.Nxe5 since, if the first one works, you already know 1.Nxe5 is not safe and you don’t have to analyze the rest of the list. In this case, the check 1...Qa5+ is more forcing, so it probably should be analyzed before 1...Qe7.
The third step is to start analyzing the list, in order. In this example, because the first move 1...Qa5+ wins the knight, it saves you (White) all the time analyzing 1...Qe7 since you already knows that 1.Nxe5 is not safe. You are no longer interested in whether 1...Qe7 also wins the knight; once you find one move that eliminates 1.Nxe5, it should be of no interest (during a game) how many other moves might also refute that candidate.
By prioritizing the list and analyzing the most likely move to refute 1.Nxe5 first, you are optimizing your thought process to be as efficient as possible and thus allowing yourself to determine as quickly and accurately as possible whether 1.Nxe5 should remain a candidate.
Tip 54
Do not just ‘assume’ moves without realizing alternatives.
This is the companion tip to the previous one, about first listing alternatives at analytical nodes. In
The Improving Chess Thinker
I used my over 50 years (I hate writing that) of experience giving de Groot ‘think out loud’ exercises and showed example protocols of players of all levels. The extensive supporting material in the book was primarily about aspects of a good thought process and typical mistakes in a poor one.
One of the common errors I find in an amateur’s thought process is getting to a node (a move in a sequence) in the move tree where there are multiple possible reasonable candidates – especially those deeper than the first ply candidates – and they just ‘assume’ a move instead of listing the possible replies, prioritizing them, and then start analyzing the one with the highest priority (Tip #53). Instead, just ‘assuming’ a move often leads to possible further problems.
The moves that are skipped may never be considered, even if the assumed move does not achieve a desired purpose for the player whose move that would be, and/or the evaluation of the assumed move might erroneously be taken to be the ‘bottom line’ evaluation of the variation, when the untried moves might greatly change that evaluation. For an example, let’s take position ‘A’ from de Groot’s famous work
Thought and Choice in Chess:
White to play
Often students will think out loud during a de Groot exercise and say something like “If 1.Nxd5 Bxd5 2.Bxd5 Nxd5 and I win a piece with 3.Bxe7.”
Aside from the fact that they are making a retained image error by failing to see that Black’s capturing knight on d5 defends the bishop on e7, they also often assume such a line makes 1.Nxd5 a good move, when all it does is assume, and examine, one of many possible capturing sequences. I would prefer they start out instead: “If I play 1.Nxd5, Black has three possible recaptures: 1...Bxd5, 1...exd5, and 1...Nxd5. Let’s examine 1...Bxd5 first. Then my bishop on a2 hangs, so I probably have to play 2.Bxd5 or maybe 2.Bxf6. If 2.Bxd5...” This thought process identifies what the branches of analysis are and the order they will be examined.
In the next example from an amateur game, Black’s previous move had captured on f1 and, of course, White should just have recaptured. But instead, White felt he could be clever and threw in
12.
Q
a4+
, assuming Black would safely block with 12...c6, 12...Nd7 or 12...Qd7.
Black to play after 12.
Q
a4+
But if White had listed all of Black’s legal responses to 12.Qa4+, one of the safe ones is the AWL
12...b5!
, which was played in the game. By hitting the queen with the pawn, Black does not give White time to capture the bishop on f1, which is ironically guarding b5. After
13.Qb4 a5
(not necessary, but sufficient)
14.Qb2 Bc4
Black was ahead a solid piece and went on to win easily.
This example not only deals with a poor assumption, but also an unnecessarily tricky move. It is certainly understandable that looking and finding tricky moves is fun and occasionally fruitful, but often it is better not to try to show people how ‘clever’ you are, but just to play the simple, good move.
Tip 55
When you see a good move, do not just look for a better one; also make sure the move you think is good is as good as you thought before you make it.
The famous ‘Lasker principle’ is “When you see a good move, don’t play it, look for a better one” to which I often add: “You are trying to play the best move you can within a reasonable amount of time.” Without that additional caveat, you would lose as you keep searching for an ever better move until your clock falls!
But when I review games with amateurs and ask why they made a certain mistake, one common cause is they got excited when they saw what they thought was a good move and played it without further thought. Unfortunately, that ‘good’ move turned out to be disastrous as they missed something critical – which often was not that difficult to see if they had given the move any further thought.
This type of error led me to develop this tip. I ‘twisted’ the famous proverb to add the additional concern that for many players what initially looks like a good move is not really one at all. Making them aware of this danger is the first step toward getting them to be a little more careful in the future.
Taking the ‘see a good move’ idea to the extreme, suppose you see a move that you think wins the game. Should you get excited and play it right away to show everyone how smart you are? No, it is in fact unwise and illogical to do so. Why? Consider the two possibilities:
• The move is truly as good as you think it is, and the game is virtually over – you have a big enough advantage to beat anyone easily.
• The move is not nearly as good as you thought it was, which often means the move is not even that good, nor best, and should not be played.
In both cases finding out is critical. In the first case, if the game is going to be virtually over, your opponent might resign or the winning position might become much easier to play. In those cases, having spent more time on the move to make sure it was really winning was not very costly.
In the second case, where further investigation reveals the ‘winning’ move to in reality not only be not winning, but possibly a mistake, the extra time to figure that out was crucial and possibly saved the game.
Therefore, in any case, when you see a move that seems to win or even just a move you think is good, it could be critical or not nearly as good as you think, so do not play it right away. Quadruple check to make sure it is really as good as you think!
Tip 56
Don’t just ask ‘Why did he make that move?’; instead determine ‘What are
all
the (important) things that move does?’
I have written and made videos about this common error on several occasions. When a student makes a mistake in a game, I don’t just say “That’s a mistake; don’t do that!”. That would not be very constructive. Instead, I try to figure out why the student made that mistake and what steps they can take to lessen the chance of a similar mistake in the future.
One of the common thought process errors occurs when a student’s opponent makes a move and the student asks him or herself ‘Why did they make that move?’ or ‘What does that move do?’ Once they find a reason, they are satisfied and abandon that line of thinking, assuming the move doesn’t do anything else. Of course, when it does, the part that they missed can be deadly.
Instead, the two questions to ask first when an opponent makes a move are “Is that move safe?” and “What are
all
the (important) things that move does?” If you miss one, that can be decisive.
Here are a couple of examples where just asking why the opponent made the move caused errors. In the following position from a student game, White’s previous move attacked the f4-knight with
20.
Q
e3
and Black responded
20...
Q
f6
, obviously guarding:
White to play after 20...
Q
f6
White assumed he knew the (only) reason for
20...
Q
f6
and decided to put a rook on the f-file to set up a future pin. Luckily for White, he played
21.Rf2?
and only lost the exchange after the unexpected (to him)
21...Qa1+ 22.Kd2 Qxh1 23.Qxf4
.
If White had instead set up the pin with the inactive rook on h1, it would have led to 21.Rf1?? Qa1#. If White had instead asked ‘What are
all
the things 20...Qf6 does?’, he might have also seen the 21...Qa1# threat.
This error is especially common among lower-rated players when the opponent’s move that has multiple purposes was forced by a player’s previous move. I made up the following easy example where White has just played
1.d5
.
Black to play after 1.d5
Black responds
1...Nf4
and White thinks ‘I know why he moved the knight – I was attacking it with a pawn; if he didn’t move it, I would have won the knight’ stops thinking, and misses the threat of 2...Qxg2#.
Similar mistakes when amateurs just think ‘Why did he make that move?’ happen all the time...
Tip 57
When asking ‘What are
all
the important things that move does?’ do not concentrate too much on just the piece that made the move.
This is a follow-up to the previous tip about finding all the things a move does. Show an absolute beginner the position after
1.Nf3 b5 2.e4
...
Black to play: Though the e-pawn moved, the discovered threat is 3.
B
xb5
...and ask him/her “What does the move 2.e4 do?” Likely he/she will miss that this creates a discovered attack by the bishop on f1 upon the black pawn on b5. That is primarily because beginners have enough difficulty concentrating upon the piece that moved (e2-e4), much less its ‘side effects’ on other pieces.
However, in teaching about 1,000 students, I have noticed that intermediate players often overlook one or more of the ways a move affects the board. So, just for the fun of it, I thought I would try to make a list of
all the ways a move can affect (or, in some cases, fail to affect) the new position it creates on the board, along with some simple examples. When a piece moves, it affects:
• The new squares the piece that moved is now attacking (or guarding). For example, after 1.e4 the e-pawn now attacks both d5 and f5. After 1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 now guards e4 (among others).
• The squares the moved piece is no longer attacking (or guarding). For example, moving the pawn with e2-e4 no longer attacks or guards d3 and f3.
• If the moved piece is a pawn, then moving it affects the squares it can no longer guard. For example, after 1.e4 not only does the pawn no longer guard d3 and f3 (as in #2), but it no longer has the option to guard d4 or f4 either (this is how weak squares are eventually created; a weak square is a square that can no longer be guarded by a pawn, e.g. 1.e3 and 2.g3 weaken both f3 and h3).
• The effect on the square where the moved piece is now residing. If this is a capture, that is a major effect. But even if it is not a capture, the piece that moved to that square may or may not be safe, e.g. 1.e4 f5 and the pawn that moved to f5 is not safe on that square,
• Discovered attacks (or moves) for your pieces (you could count this as two different affects if you prefer). The discovered attack is the example we used at the start of the tip: 1.Nf3 b5 2.e4 discovers and attack on an opponent’s piece, the white bishop on f1 on the black pawn on b5. A simple example of a discovered move is that 1.e4 discovers lines for the white queen, king, and bishop, not that the king is likely to play Ke2 soon thereafter/
• Discovered attacks (or moves) for the opponent’s pieces. For example, Black to play 1...b5.
Black to move before 1...b5
1...b5
discovers an attack for the opponent’s rook upon his own bishop.
• Blocking an attack or guard (or just the moves) of your own pieces, e.g. after our earlier example of 1.Nf3 b5 2.e4 if Black ignores the attack on b5 with 2...e6, then if White plays 3.d3 that blocks (interferes with) his own bishop’s attack on b5.
An example of just blocking moves would be that 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 at least temporarily blocks the white queen’s possibilities to go to f3, g4 and h5.
• Blocking an attack (or moves or guard) of an opponent’s piece. This is the common ‘interposition’. So in the King’s Gambit if 1.e4 e5 2.f4 Qh4+, then White can simply block with 3.g3. This not only stops the check on e1, but prevents the black queen’s ability to go to f2 as well.
• A move with the king or rook might affect the right to castle. For example after 1.Nf3 d5 2.Rg1 White can no longer castle kingside later in the game, even if he returns the rook to h1.
• Finally, there is the ‘effect’ of not addressing (and thus allowing) other issues on the board. For example:
White to play
Suppose Black answers the attack
1.f4
with
1...b5
. This affects the board in a strong way by
not
saving the queen. The decision to consciously (or not intentionally) not save the queen has a major effect.
As a further example of the final bulleted item, a move can leave other issue(s) unaddressed. For example, after 1.Nf3 b5 2.e4 e6 White can capture with 3.Bxb5, but suppose he instead plays 3.d4. Then Black can leave the issue of the hanging b5-pawn unaddressed with a move like 3...Be7, and White can further do the same with a move like 4.Be2, when either or both players can, purposely or not, leave unresolved issues like the safety of b5.
In most games between strong players, if one player misses an issue, the other is likely to resolve it in his favor immediately. However, watch any two beginners play and important safety issues often stay on the board move after move. Moreover, with absolute beginners, when they play over-the-board (where illegal moves are possible; online the server does not allow them), you might see a position where both kings are in check for several moves!
I may have omitted a few esoteric ways a move can affect the board, but hopefully you get the idea: when you contemplate your opponent’s move and each of your own candidate moves and ask the most important questions ‘What are
all
the important things that move does?’ and ‘Is that move safe?’, you can’t only concentrate on the piece that moved and the squares it attacks. It only takes missing one consequence of a move to allow the opponent an opportunity. And since it may only require one bad move to lose a game, missing that one key point of one move can be enough to tip the balance.
If you are not an experienced player, hopefully this tip will help you assess the effects of both sides’ moves more carefully. And even if you are an experienced player and all of this was already known to you, it does not hurt to have a fresh reminder.
Tip 58
The best (only?) way to prove a move is safe is to assume it is not safe and try to show why. Then, if all attempts to show it is not safe (via the opponent’s checks, captures, threats) fail, it must be safe.
It is sometimes easier to prove a positive (‘safe’) by assuming a negative and then, if the negative is not true, the positive is correct. In chess, that means when attempting to prove if a move is safe – yours or your opponent’s – you could start by assuming it is not safe, try to find a sequence/combination that wins material or mate and, if you can prove that the attempt fails, therefore assume the move is safe.
In the following position, Black to play, suppose our candidate move is 1...Qc7 to get out of the pin, but we want to prove it is safe. Then we can visualize 1...Qc7 and try to find a combination for White that would win material or mate.
Black to play
The moves we are most worried about are White’s checks, captures, and threats. After
1...Qc7
White could try:
• 2.N4xe5. Then 2...Qxe5 allows at least 3.Rxd7, so 2...Nxe5 and the further 3.Nxe5? Bxe2 4.Rd7 Qxe5 is safe.
• 2.Bxd7 Nxd7 (2...Bxf3 is also possible) is safe.
• 2.N3xe5?! Bxe2! (simply 2...Nxe5 guarding g4 should already be safe, but not as good) 3.Rxd7 R(either)d8! (3...Rad8! 3...Rfd8!), pinning the rook to the back-rank mate and saving the queen (but 3...Qb8 was sufficient).
None of these candidates win material for White so we can conclude 1...Qc7 is safe. If you don’t figure this out before you move, that’s Hope Chess and you are just lucky if it turns out White hasn’t a move that wins material or mates.
In our second example my first candidate move is 1.Nc3. But just because a move is put first on my list of candidates does not make it safe or even a good move. Is 1.Nc3 safe?
White to play
After
1.Nc3
we again have to consider Black’s possible dangerous checks, captures, and threats:
• All of Black’s checks are easily met.
• The capture 1...Nxc3 2.bxc3 doubles White’s c-pawns, but guards the discovered attack on d4 with the pawn capturing on c3.
• The capture 1...Rxh3 2.Kxh3 Rh8+ leads nowhere for Black.
• Black can make other discovered attacks on the d-pawn by moving the d5-knight other places than c3. Are any dangerous? Most can be met by 2.Be3 or 2.Ne2, but the double threat 1...Nb4 is the one that’s concerning. Then both c2 and d4 are threatened and there’s no way to stop 2...Nxc2 winning a pawn.
Therefore, 1.Nc3 must be rejected because of the reply 1...Nb4, winning a pawn. 1.Nc3 is not safe. I’ve given this position to hundreds of students and the break-even point is about 1600 USCF/FIDE; half the students rated at that level get the problem correct. But they are alerted because this is a lesson problem; if this position occurred in a game I am assuming even players around 1700 might easily consider 1.Nc3 safe.
Tip 59
In chess, all flashing lights are red! Whether you see danger that will take time to best meet or you see a move that seems to win, either is critical, so in both cases take your time.
We covered the ‘move that seems to win’ case in Tip #55. To build on the ‘flashing red’ idea, I like to tell the following story to students because it gives them some insight into time management and criticality assessment.
After he became world champion, Vladimir Kramnik played a match in 2002 against
Deep Fritz,
with a prize of about $1,000,000. (Note: This was during the relatively brief period when the best PC-based engines and the top grandmasters were relatively on the same level, so such a contest was interesting. Today it would be like a human trying to race against a car.)
Before Kramnik’s final move, the engine had played a move that allowed Kramnik to trade rooks into an apparently easily winning king and pawn endgame. If I remember correctly, when the engine made this move, Kramnik had 17 minutes on his clock. I was watching on the Internet Chess Club (ICC), which at the time was likely the most active chess server. There were probably a thousand or more also watching and commenting online on the relayed ICC game board.
When the engine made the move, everyone starting typing “Rd5+ wins!” and even in those days many had engines running to confirm that the trade was indeed winning. But when Kramnik did not move right away, the enthusiasm soon turned to scorn. At first they typed comments like “Why is he not moving?” or “What is wrong with Kramnik?”. But later the scorn turned to outright criticism with remarks like: “Kramnik can’t be that good – how could he not have played Rd5+ already?” Or “I must be better than Kramnik – I would have played that move a long time ago!”
I watched in amazement as many of the spectators continued to criticize Kramnik. Finally, after a 10-minute think and with seven minutes left on his clock, Kramnik made the move which traded rooks.
I thought the computer resigned a couple moves later, but the ChessGames website shows the engine resigned on that move. In any case, after the game, Kramnik went to the press briefing and one of the first questions was: “Why did you take so long to play 57.Rd5+?”
Kramnik looked a little startled as if it was a strange question, but immediately settled in to explain (I paraphrase):
“Well, of course I saw right away that trading rooks was probably a win. But I am playing for a million dollars, so I wanted to analyze it carefully to make sure. I spent the next few minutes analyzing the lines and came to the conclusion that indeed it did win. So, I looked at my clock and I still had 13 minutes left, so I figured I would look for some crazy computer moves that a human might not think of, in case there was something there that I missed. So, I searched for some, but I couldn’t find any. Then I looked at my clock and I still had 10 minutes left, so I decided I may as well check my original analysis to see if I might have missed anything. I could not find any problems and then I checked my clock again. At that point I was down to 7 minutes and I thought that’s about right, so I made the move. Then, of course, the engine soon resigned.”
At this point I ask my students: “Who was right, Kramnik or the critics?” Of course, they all agree with Kramnik. Many of his critics made the very poor assumption that ‘the faster you see and play something, the smarter you are’ when in fact playing a critical move quickly, even if it seems to win, is not just not smart, it is also not wise. Kramnik did not get to be world champion because he played critical moves hastily.
There is a lot to be learned about criticality assessment and time management from this story. In their book
Chess Rules of Thumb
, Alburt and Lawrence state that any position where you see a move that “seems to win” is a critical position, and a critical position is “one about which you should think long and hard.”
I agree and go a step further to tell my students, “In chess, all flashing lights are red!” meaning whether you see good stuff (apparent wins) or bad stuff (danger), those both require extra careful thought. It is wrong to play quickly and then slow down only after you get into trouble; instead, play slowly to try to avoid trouble. However, if trouble does occur, most players at least understand that getting out of it may be critical and they usually play slowly. But it’s just as important to be careful when you think you are winning and have a lot to lose by hastily trying to win.
Tip 60
If you are not sure a move is critical, you must assume it may be!
Suppose you are driving a car at night and you come to a sharp curve in the road. Do you: Assume all is clear and just zoom around the corner blindly, or assume there might be something there and slow down in case there is?
If your answer is #1, good luck! You may not be around to read too many more of my chess tips!
In driving we call this ‘defensive driving’ and in life we call this ‘assume the worst case’. Many chess situations call for very similar logic. I call the ability to determine if a move may possibly have a great effect on the outcome ‘criticality assessment’. But suppose your criticality assessment is not that good and you don’t know if a move is critical. In that case, if you have sufficient time on your clock, then you assume the worst case – that the position might be critical – take your time, and do the best analysis you can. This would be true no matter how good you are at analysis; you have nothing to lose, so why not try and do your best?
The following game has a position which illustrates that. On move 51, White has plenty of time and there is only a king, rook, and pawn versus king and rook. The game will quickly dissolve into a win for the player with the pawn or a draw. If you are inexperienced, you might not know which it would be, but you should be able to sense that you are nearing the end, so therefore you have plenty of time to see if you can figure it out. You have nothing to lose.
White to play after 50...
R
xd5
51.a7??
Played in about 17 seconds even though White had 27 minutes left! Can you do better? The game concluded:
51...Kb7 52.Rh8 Ra5 53.Rh7+
½-½
White very quickly played 51.a7. If he had looked for his checks, captures, and threats, he might, just might, have seen that 51.Rc8+, his only check, wins: if 51...Kb6 52.Kxd5, 51...Kd6 52.Rd8+ wins the rook, and 51...Kd7 (the best try) 52.a7 (but not 52.Kxd5 Kxc8 with an easy draw) 52...Ra5 (or 52...Kxc8 53.a8=Q+ and 54.Qxd5) 53.a8=Q wins.
Even if you are not a good analyst, it doesn’t take a lot of skill or experience to realize that you have nothing to lose by trying to figure this out. And it not only doesn’t hurt to try – it actually helps! You will slowly improve. That means it is doubly good to try – you might succeed and, at worst, you will enhance your ability to try in the future! To realize that you must take your time and at least try – especially in the endgame where moves are much more likely to be critical – does not require any great chess skill. It only requires a little ‘life’ wisdom, something any wise adult should possess.
I have dubbed this problem of not playing slowly when you have plenty of time, especially when you may not know if the move is critical (essentially not assuming the worst case, that it is), ‘The Wise Adult Syndrome’. Hopefully any wise adult would realize they have nothing to lose and should play slowly and try, no matter what their expectation and analysis skills. You do not have to be a great player to at least take some time and see what you can find.
Tip 61
Just because a move is tricky and clever doesn’t necessarily make it best or even good.
I have seen many players who consistently do one or more of the following:
• If one of their pieces is attacked by a piece of lesser value (AWL; Tip #94) and there is a zwischenzug (in-between move) they can play instead of just moving the piece to a safe square, they will play the zwischenzug,
• If there is an en passant possibility, they will always play it.
• If they see any tricky sequence, they will more likely play it than an equally better or even superior calm move.
• If they make a mistake and the only way of saving grace is, on the next move, to take back (reverse) their previous move, they will compound their mistake by making an inferior move rather than admit their mistake.
For example, I have seen the following mistake several times in similar positions:
Black to play
Instead of just saving the attacked knight by simply moving it, Black ‘counter-attacks’ with
1...Bb4+??
and after
2.c3
will lose a piece with two pieces attacked by pawns. I think there are several explanations for this:
• Players like to show how smart they are. Therefore, instead of making the simple move which anyone can make, they will show everyone that they can find a more clever response.
• Players want to show their opponent they can’t be bullied or pushed around. Therefore, instead of a “meek” (smart) retreating move, they will play an aggressive counter-attacking move.
• The games published in books, videos and other media are often the exceptional games where something imbalanced happens and one player eventually does make clever moves to win. The majority of games, where both sides play well and end in draws (or perhaps more mundane wins) are not the ones published. This is called a ‘biased sample’ and the amateur public that consistently sees these exceptional master games conclude that finding extraordinary moves is the right way to play chess.
• It is more fun to play tricky moves!
Occam’s Razor states that the simplest solution is often correct. But the lure of the reasons listed above often entices weaker players to play inferior moves. Here is another example; White has just captured a piece on d4:
Black to play – Is 1...
B
h3 good, bad, or neutral?
Black has a choice of two moves: he can recapture the piece with 1...exd4, or he can play the zwischenzug 1...Bh3 first, threatening mate and then, after White stops the mate, he can then play 2...exd4, regaining the piece.
Whenever one has a zwischenzug, it is like any other move: it can be good/beneficial, bad, or it might just have a neutral effect and be no better or worse than another good move.
In the diagram above, is 1...Bh3 good, bad, or neutral?
The game continued
1...Bh3?? 2.Bf3 exd4 3.Re1+??
, but when I reviewed the game with my student, I pointed out he could play a removal-of-the-guard tactic instead with 3.Qe1+!. The double attack on the black queen forces 3...Qxe1 4.Rxe1+, but now the g-pawn is no longer pinned and thus the bishop on h3 is no longer guarded. Further, the retreat 4...Be6 also loses the bishop.
Years later another student cleverly noticed that White has another way of winning with 1...Bh3?? 2.Bb5+ when, no matter how Black gets out of check, White can play 3.Qf3. There are multiple possibilities, but he was correct; this is more complicated but, again, White is winning material.
Therefore, when you see a move like 1...Bh3, don’t think ‘Aha, I will show him! Instead of recapturing I will threaten mate!’ but rather ‘Is 1...Bh3 better than simply 1...exd4? If I play 1...Bh3 how will White stop mate and, in doing so, is that better for me than if I just recapture now?’
Remember Tip #8, which stated that you usually learn more from unclear variations than from ‘dull’ equal ones. But that does not mean that tricky moves are always good (some are clearly terrible!). Next time you see a tricky move – and we hope that is often – just don’t be swayed into thinking that tricky must be good. Especially when you are in otherwise good positions, don’t spoil them by quickly playing clever but unchecked variations. Another way of saying this is: Don’t make chess harder than it is; sometimes Occam’s Razor is correct: the simplest solution is often the best one.
Tip 62
Avoid the common ‘ABC’ error of moving quickly without recalculating sequences that you analyzed on previous moves.
When a student makes a mistake, I don’t just say “That’s a bad move; don’t do it again”. Instead, I ask “What caused that error?” so that if we identify the cause, I have a chance to make a suggestion that will make that error less likely to occur in future similar situations. One of the common errors I find occurs when my student says “I made that move fast because I had calculated it on the previous move.”
For the purposes of this discussion, let us label a player’s current candidate move ‘A’, the opponent’s expected (or most dangerous) reply ‘B’ and the player’s expected reply to ‘B’ on his next move as ‘C’. We can shortcut our nomenclature by calling this expected sequence ‘ABC’ as calculated when A is the candidate move.
The ABC error occurs when A and B are played and then the player makes move C immediately (or at least very quickly), and it turns out C is either not optimum or maybe an outright blunder.
Start with an important fact: when analyzing A, the purpose of C is often to ensure that you can safely meet B – in chess we call the possibility ‘BC’ the ‘tactical justification’ of candidate A. But just because C justifies A does
not
mean that C is forced or even the best move if B is played. Sometimes C is the best move, and sometimes it is not, but you need to make sure there is a C when you play A or else you are playing Hope Chess (Tip #65), and if someone makes a forcing move B in response to your move A then without a C already in mind, you are hoping that you have a defense to B and, if not, that can cost you the game.
So even though the existence of a saving or follow-up C is necessary to play A, it may not be that good or you may have calculated incorrectly! Sometimes A is fine, but the error was thinking C should follow B, when that may be a blunder.
Therefore, the correct thing to do when you calculate ABC, play A, and your opponent responds with B is:
• Re-analyze C slowly and carefully to make sure it is just as good as you thought it was when you anticipated it on the previous move (note: the position has changed from when you calculated C last move, so at the least your visualization should be better!).
• If move C is as good as you previously thought
and
it wins the game easily, quadruple check it and play it. But more likely it doesn’t win the game so, in that case, put it in your pocket as your ‘King of the Hill’ (the best move found so far), and do your normal search for a better move.
• If move C is not as good as you thought it was, it is possible you are in trouble, especially if it is the best move. But you don’t know that yet, so since it’s not as good, immediately start searching for a better move.
Confused by too many letters? Here’s an example:
White to play
White calculated 1.Bh7+ (A) and if 1...Kh8 (B), then 2.Ne5 (C) hitting the pinned knight and threatening 3.Nxf7#. So White played
1.Bh7+
and after
1...Kh8
(1...Kf8 is better, but also bad for Black) White fairly quickly played
2.Ne5
. Black defended by sacrificing his queen with
2...Nxe5!
, a move White did not expect. After
3.Rxd8 Rcxd8
Black had a rook and a knight for his queen with plenty of play left on the board. Although White was much better, Black eventually won.
But instead of rattling off his intended C, 2.Ne5, so quickly, White had a much better move by reversing the move order and playing 2.Rxd7! first then after 2...Qxd7, 3.Ne5 would threaten both 4.Nxd7 and 4.Nxf7#. After 3...Bxh4 (what else?) 4.Nxd7 White would be ahead a queen for a rook, an entire piece better than he was after the inferior 2.Ne5.
Next time you calculate a sequence, make sure to ‘start afresh’ on the next move and (re-) do the work. Relying on what you calculated on the previous move can be dangerous to your chess health.
Tip 63
Suppose you analyze a promising line that does not seem to work because it superficially seems to loses material. At the point the material is lost, ask ‘Are there further checks, captures, or threats that might change the evaluation?’
If there are further forcing moves which might change the evaluation, it is worthwhile to investigate that line further. If you don’t analyze further and the line does turn out to be beneficial, that’s called a quiescence error (Tip #44), because you stopped analyzing too soon when the position wasn’t ‘quiet’.
Avoiding quiescence errors is one of the big differences between lower class players (1000-1400) and upper class players (1600-1900). Lower-rated players complain, “I can get all the puzzles right in a book or an online puzzle set [when the requirement of the puzzle tells them to keep looking because something is there!], but then I miss the same thing in a game [when they must create their own stopping point by asking the question above].”
Here’s a common example I give to my students:
White to play
In this position, notice that ‘White to play’ is different than ‘White to play and win’ and ‘White to play and mate’. The more defined the requirement, the easier the problem becomes!
If this position occurred in a game, a lower-rated player might miss the idea completely. If the position is shown as a problem that simply asks for White’s best move, then it is also possible to miss the main idea, but less likely. However, if we go all the way to White to play and mate, that narrows down the possibilities so much that it is much easier to find the solution, since only a few moves even threaten mate.
For example, a move like 1.Qd3, threatening the sneaky pin 2.Qxg6 might be enough for ‘White to play and win’ if there were no defenses (there are).
In a game, if White rejects
1.Qxd4
(threatening 2.Qxg7#) because it ‘loses the queen’ to
1...Bxd4
, that would be a quiescence error. But even in a game – much less a puzzle – a stronger player would easily notice that
2.Bxd4
threatens 3.Rh8#, and so the sequence is worth investigating further. That is when most notice that the ‘obvious’ defense 2...f6 is illegal due to the pin of the bishop on c4, and now the tactic is ‘on’!
When I was first shown this position, I was under the impression this was a ‘White to play and win’ problem. I stopped analyzing after
1.Qxd4 Bxd4 2.Bxd4 Qxe2+ 3.Kxe2 Rfe8+ 4.Kf1 Kf8
when White is ahead a bishop. In fact, White can continue
5.Bf6
and it’s going to be mate anyway. Black can throw a few pieces in the way to make the longest line mate in 9, but it is clear White is winning with just the analysis above.
The concept in criticality assessment that if you see a potentially powerful line that at first does not seem to work, but you continue because the risk/reward benefit is so great, is called ‘trying to make it work’ where ‘it’ represents your potentially winning move or idea. So next time you see an idea and/or move that might win, but at first it seems the opponent has a defense, it is likely worth some extra time to see if you can make it work!
Tip 64
If your opponent makes a game winning threat and you have time on your clock to try and thwart it, you need to take whatever time is necessary to see if there is a solution.
If you do
not
take your time and just let him execute his threat, I call that ‘acquiescing’. Here is an example from a recent student game:
Black to move after 30.
Q
xg6
Black is in trouble as he only has two bishops for a rook and three pawns, plus his king is exposed. White’s last move double-attacked the rook on e8 and the bishop on g2. The time limit of the game was 45 minutes plus a 45-second increment on each move. Both sides had been playing too quickly and Black still had over 32 minutes on his clock. What should Black do?
There is only one move that saves both pieces and continues to make a fight of the game:
30...Bc6
, saving the bishop and guarding the rook. So Black needs to take whatever time is necessary to try to find this move. If he has a long think and still can’t find it, that happens; he is human and sometimes we fail to find even one-move solutions.
But instead of taking time to try to find the move, Black took 35 seconds – less than the increment and leaving him with still over 32 minutes remaining – and played the capitulating
30...Re7??
. After
31.Qxg2
he could have resigned, but he played a few more moves.
When I asked him after the game why he did not play 30...Bc6, he gave the common reply “I didn’t see it” (Tip #50). But it was not so much he did not see the saving move as he did not take the necessary time to fully try. This was an excellent example of acquiescing!
Here is another example:
Black to play
Unfortunately, I don’t have the time-stamping, but if I recall correctly, Black fairly quickly determined he did not have any safe moves for the knight, so he decided to use a tempo to sacrifice it with
1...Ne3??
, so that after
2.Qxe3 Qxe3+ 3.Kxe3
he could achieve something he wanted to do: trade queens.
This is definitely a sign of acquiescing to the apparent threat to the knight because Black had better alternatives. For example, simply the Counting (Tip #99) continuation 1...Qxf3+ 2.Qxf3 Rxf3+ 3.Rxf3 allows him save the knight with 3...Nf4 or maybe 3...Nh4 when Black is ahead two pieces for a rook. Unlike the game, where Black lost an entire piece, 1...Qxf3+ only loses the exchange (rook for knight), and in this position that makes all the difference.
But even better is the cute 1...Qxf3 2.Qxf3 Ne1+! when Black remains ahead a full piece. When you see a good move, look for a better one...
Tip 65
It is acceptable to hope for some things when playing chess, but do not play ‘Hope Chess’!
Let’s list some of the things you might hope for during a chess game:
• You make a threat and hope your opponent does not see it.
• You analyze a line and hope your opponent plays inferior moves which make the line look good.
• You make a mistake and hope your opponent does not see it and capitalize.
• You get a bad position and hope your opponent makes a mistake and lets you back in the game or even win.
These are many of the things you can hope for but, when I originally wrote about ‘Hope Chess’ in my
Chess Café
article ‘The Secrets of Real Chess’, I meant none of the above!
My definition of Hope Chess was: “When you have a candidate move and do
not
analyze ‘If I make this move and my opponent replies with a dangerous check, capture, or threat, can I safely meet it
next
move?’”
Therefore, if you do make such a move without analyzing for dangerous replies and the opponent
does
reply with a check, capture or threat, you think ‘Uh-oh! I did not anticipate that; what should I do now?’ That is Hope Chess because now you are just ‘hoping’ you can meet their check, capture, or threat safely. If you can, you are just lucky; if you can’t, your previous move may have been the critical mistake that loses the game.
In my experience I have found that most players under 1700 play some form of Hope Chess, although the ones in the 1400-1700 range at least usually use their tactical vision to see if there is any apparent danger before they play their candidate move.
When asked “What’s the worse example of Hope Chess you have ever seen?” (and indeed, arguably one of the worst moves, period), I offer the following amusing but painful example from a game where a student had White:
White to play
White should play 1.Qf3+ Kg1 (1...Ke1 2.Qe2#) 2.Qf2+ Kh1 3.Qxh4+ and now:
a) 3...Kg2 4.Qf2+ Kh3 (or 4...Kh1 5.Qf3+ and if the king moves, 6.Qxc6 with a tablebase win, or if 5...Qg2 6.Qxg2+ Kxg2 7.Ke4 will win the c-pawn and the game) 5.Qf3+ and again either the king moves and 6.Qxc6 or 5...Qg3 6.Qxg3+ Kxg3 7.Ke4 wins the c-pawn as before.
b) 3...Kg1 4.Qf2+ Kh1 5.Qf3+ transposing into the parenthetical 4...Kh1 5.Qf3+ line above, winning.
Instead, White used hand-waving to make ‘the most forcing’ move, also a monstrous Hope Chess example:
1.Qh1+??
This is not just Hope Chess, but forcing Black to win!
1...Qg1+
What did White expect? He could not have analyzed this move, which is Black’s only legal reply, because the double threat of check and taking the white queen wins easily and instantly for his opponent. If he had analyzed 1.Qh1+??, he could not have missed that he could not safely play it!
2.Qxg1+
Forced, or else White loses his queen.
2...Kxg1 3.Kf3 h3
And White resigned! It is difficult to find game positions where you can not only blunder, but practically force your opponent to see it and win, but this was a doozy!
Tip 66
For positional and tactical considerations, short-term ‘sure’ aspects usually outweigh long-term possible consequences.
When I analyze students’ games with them and ask why they made one move and not another, I notice they sometimes make the curious error of weighing vague long-term possibilities which have a small chance to occur over short-term considerations that surely will occur. While that occasionally might be the correct weighting, much more often the issues that will occur should have greater weight.
White to play after 1...
N
xf3+
The above position was created from one that happened in a recent student game. I have added a white pawn on c4 to compensate for the one my student had lost, so we can consider a position of equal material:
In similar positions almost all students rated under 1800 play 2.Bxf3,
since 2.Rxf3? loses the exchange and 2.gxf3 “opens up the white king for attack”. But when I gave this position to the engine, it preferred 2.gxf3 by about a third of a pawn.
Here are the benefits of 2.gxf3:
• It brings more pawns to the middle (Tip #129).
• It overprotects e4 so the rest of the white pieces don’t have to.
• It attacks the bishop with a pawn (AWL tip #94) so forces Black to use the tempo to move the bishop.
All these ‘immediate’ benefits outweigh the longer-term concern of ‘opening up the king’ to a nebulous attack where currently the only black piece in the vicinity is the bishop and it is difficult for Black to transfer his queen to the kingside.
Tip 67
The main thing to do when way ahead is ‘Think defense first’, which is not at all the same as ‘Play defensively’.
I have a list of six things to keep in mind when you are way ahead (roughly the exchange or more, or 1.75+ on an engine evaluation):
• Think Defense First.
• Keep It Simple (the KISS principle).
• Make fair trades of pieces, not necessarily pawns.
• Don’t worry about the little things.
• Use all your pieces all the time.
• Don’t get into unnecessary time pressure.
Of these six the most misunderstood/misquoted is #1. I have seen many players quote me as saying something like “
Dan says when you are way ahead you should play defensively.
” I do not believe this and I have never said or written this anywhere.
It is true the words ‘defense’ and ‘defensively’ are similar; but “think defense first” is
an ordering
of how you should think, while “play defensively” is a style and mindset. They are, in practice, completely different.
I give the example: Suppose there are 100 issues you could address on a move when you are winning easily. Three of them involve ideas of how your opponent could get back in the game and draw or win (e.g., trapping your queen or back-rank mate), and the other 97 are offensive/attacking ideas. Then all I am suggesting is to first check those three issues where you could get into trouble; if they are all covered, go offense! Go attack! In that case your opponent has nothing that can harm you so play an offense move – don’t move defensively after you have thought defense first and everything checked out 100% safely.
As a further example, we will compare two positions:
White to play
White is ahead a piece for a pawn, normally enough to win easily with some care so, if White thinks defense first, he should recognize at least two ways for Black to get back in the game:
• His back rank is weak so ...Re1# must be stopped.
• The black passed pawn on the b-file at some point could become dangerous.
So, in this case offense must be delayed a move and a luft move like 1.g3 is required. Compare this to the following similar position:
White to play
Thinking defense first, Black still has a passed pawn, but the pawn is blockaded harmlessly by a knight on a square of the opposite color of the black bishop. Secondly, a back-rank mate is possible, but only if Black can get a rook to an open file to access the first rank, and also place the dark-squared bishop on the h2-b8 diagonal to cover h2.
Therefore, it would not be unreasonable to stop the back rank mates permanently with a move like 1.g3. But most strong (and weak!) players would not do this since the threat is not imminent and offensive moves to threaten f7 like 1.Bd5
or 1.Nd6
or 1.Ne5 are available.
The engine – who doesn’t need to think defense first since it can never accidentally forget to stop back rank mate or get its queen trapped – gives as its top three moves: 1.h4, 1.Bd5,
and 1.g3 (nonetheless!).
So in the second example we thought defense first, but due to the lack of an imminent threat, we could play offensively with a move like 1.Bd5. It is still nice for White to keep in mind (as Black surely will!) the possibility of ...Bf4 followed by ...Re8, threatening ...Re1# and make sure to stop it before it ever becomes threatening. As a general principle (*Tip Alert!*),
you want to prevent dangerous situations before they ever get dangerous rather than waiting until the threat is imminent and thinking ‘Uh-oh! What do I do now?’ when the answer might be ‘Too late! The threat is unstoppable!’
Tip 68
Weaker players are often advised by their coaches to do a ‘sanity check’ just before they make a move to make sure the intended move is not crazy. But stronger players do not usually do sanity checks – they are not efficient.
In the following position, the previous moves were
1...
R
g8+ 2.
K
g4-f5
R
e6-c6
:
White to play after 2...
R
c6
White thought for a while and then wrote 3.Rc1 on his scoresheet (note that writing moves on a scoresheet before making them is against modern FIDE rules; US Chess Federation rules do allow this as an option). After a while he did not play 3.Rc1, but instead played 3.f4. What did his actions, and their timing, tell us about his thought process?
First, the fact that he wrote the move down and thought for a while longer tells us White was doing a sanity check. It also tells us that while he was initially more concerned that Black’s previous move was threatening his c-pawn, he did not check to see if candidate moves that might save the c-pawn were safe. Because if he had asked, ‘If I play 3.Rc1 what are all of my opponent’s dangerous checks, captures, and threats?’ then he would have immediately found that the only reply of check, 3...Rg5#, was checkmate!
But he could not have done that because if he had, he would have rejected any defense of the c-pawn and would not have gotten so far as to write 3.Rc1 on his scoresheet. When you don’t check to see if a move is safe this way, I call that ‘Hope Chess’ (Tip #65), because if the opponent does make a check, capture, or threat in response to an unchecked move, you hope you have a defense. Many players who play Hope Chess are justified in doing a sanity check to prevent disasters.
However, since strong players do not play Hope Chess, they efficiently filter out unsafe moves long before it is time to make the move. To perform a sanity check and when the move is found to be not safe, to be forced to go from the apparent end of the thought process all the way back to ‘square one’ is inefficient, to say the least. Therefore, while strong players may surely make ‘last second’ double-checks to make sure the move they are about to play is good for the reasons they thought, they rarely perform sanity checks.
Tip 69
One of the main chess skills is evaluation: determining which side stands better, how much better, and why. Honing your evaluation skill(s) is very important.
While the central thought process skill is analysis, once analysis is finished for a particular sequence of moves, the position should be evaluated. It is entirely possible to analyze a sequence correctly, but then incorrectly evaluate the resultant position. In that case an inferior move might be chosen, or a superior move discarded.
The following position occurred when I was playing in the Pennsylvania State High School Championship during my second year of serious play. This game was the fourth one of the day and I was very tired. Earlier in the game I had mis-analyzed a position and lost the exchange for a pawn:
Wahrenberger–Heisman, 1968
Black to play
In this position my opponent offered a draw and knowing then only the what I call the ‘Reinfeld’ values for the pieces (§=1, B=N=3, R=5, Q=9; Tip #98), I erroneously concluded that I probably stood slightly worse and accepted the draw.
When I got back to the motel room with my friend Lester, he asked me why I gave my opponent a draw. I told him I was tired and had lost the exchange. He protested that I was much better and challenged me to play a few moves. I did and quickly realized that he was correct; I had badly misevaluated the position. This turned out to be the key game and I finished in second place behind my opponent.
Not that much later in my development I learned that the ‘integer-only’ Reinfeld values can be fairly inaccurate in many positions. GM Larry Kaufman has written extensively about determining the average values of the pieces and GM Soltis wrote a book
Rethinking the Chess Pieces
. Several years after this game was played, I wrote my first chess book
Elements of Positional Evaluation: How the Pieces Get Their Power
which was, ironically, not about evaluating positions, but more about evaluating the power of each piece in a position. There is, however, a new book devoted entirely to evaluating positions:
Evaluate Like a Grandmaster
by Perelshteyn and Solon.
As a short summary, both the Perelshteyn/Solon book and my works use the identical set of the four main evaluation criteria for positions:
•
Material Balance
– using ‘average’ piece values.
•
King Safety
– speaks for itself.
•
Piece Activity
– active pieces are more valuable than less active ones, in the same way that a queen is more valuable than a rook because it has more mobility, and thus activity.
•
Pawn Structure
– possibly the least important of the four, but still important enough to make the difference in a game.
Ideally, when analyzing, you want to reach ‘quiescence’ before you evaluate. Quiescence means there are no further forcing moves (checks, captures, and threats) that might strongly alter the evaluation of a position (Tip #44). While it is not always possible to reach quiescence in every evaluation (unclear sacrifices being an example), most evaluation is done once ‘the smoke has cleared’.
Besides purchasing a new book or just playing many slow games and analyzing them with opponents and strong players, another way to hone your evaluation skills is to take interesting, especially materially unbalanced, positions from your games and others – grandmasters will do – and make an ‘engine-like’ numerical evaluation where, for example, ‘-1.0’ means Black is better by about a pawn, ‘0.0’ is dead even, and ‘+1.0’ means White is better by about a pawn. Then turn on a strong engine like Stockfish and compare your answer with its answer. If they are close, great! If not so close, use Tip #7, learn by playing ‘What if” games’ with a strong engine, and try to figure out why your guess was wrong – we will assume a 3500 level engine’s evaluation is probably the right one!
Chapter Three
Psychology
This chapter provides tips which deal with a player’s mental approach to playing, studying, getting feedback, and the proper attitude to take when encountering various common chess situations. It also includes the important areas of how to adjust your psychology and approach depending on the state of the game, e.g. winning, losing, one or both players in time pressure, type of opponent, etc.
Tip 70
*Top-10 Tip*
Do not be afraid of losing; be concerned about playing a game and not learning anything (or learning something and failing to apply it in the future).
Almost all agree it is more ‘fun’ to lose 100 tough games against someone a little better than they are, than to scholar’s mate a beginner 100 games in a row. GM Yasser Seirawan once asked 1000+ scholastic players at the Nationals: “Who here has lost 10,000 games?” One kid near the back raised his hand, Yasser pointed at him and said, “You’re on the right track!”
Occasionally a new student, when asked about his/her weaknesses, will say “I am afraid of playing because I don’t like to lose.” That is understandable; the goal of the game is to win and, due to the ‘non-luck’ aspect to chess, losing is often taken more personally than it would on games where other excuses are more readily acceptable.
Then I ask students to consider a scale of “fear of losing” from 0-100 where:
• 0 represents absolutely no concern with losing. The result doesn’t matter at all; it’s just a game.
• 100 represents mortal fear – so much fear that losing a game puts you in a state where you can’t play, talk to anyone, etc.
Where do you think most grandmasters fall in such a scale? My answer is that most grandmasters fall between 60 and 85. Anything below that level and they won’t have sufficient drive to improve; you need to want to win enough that you are willing to do years of work to get to the highest level.
On the other hand, a score above 80-85 would indicate that losing is so painful that doing all the losing that GM Seirawan indicated would not be possible. A strong player’s score on this scale likely has to fall in the ‘sweet spot’ where losing is to be avoided as best possible by doing all that work, but not so much that progress is inhibited.
No one likes to lose, but in the long run most players are going to score only about 50% of their points, so learning to deal with losing is part of becoming a good player. Learn to ask ‘what is the main reason I lost?’ and takes proactive steps toward reducing the chances of the same mistake(s) in the future.
‘And not learning anything’ is the other aspect to this tip. When I first started out, I religiously consulted
MCO-10
after each game, fast or slow, to ask: ‘If I had to play this game again, on which opening move would I improve?’ Then I would do my best to remember and apply. It seemed obvious and paramount to me that if I had material that told me how I could do better in the future, I had to use it or I could not live with myself to make the same mistakes repeatedly.
I have taught over 1,000 students one-to-one privately and, when the subject comes up about looking up their openings after a game with a book, engine, database, and/or video, fewer than 10% were already doing that (some just occasionally). Moreover, even after making that suggestion – strongly – a surprisingly low percentage of my students began doing it consistently, even though it only involved a few minutes of time after each game.
I think this reluctance to take those few minutes consistently, even after being made aware of its benefits, says something about not only the perceived ‘difficulty’ of looking up an opening (everything is easy when you know how), but also to the problems lower-rated players have of remembering what they are shown. The better one’s board vision, the better they can remember a pattern to help reduce repetition of past mistakes.
Of course, there is much more to be learned from going over a game (win, lose, or draw) than the way you could have improved in the opening. See Tip #3 about analyzing with strong players and Tip #7 about learning by playing ‘What if?’ with an engine. Finally, there is only one person who knows the ‘whys’ of your opponent’s moves and ideas, and that is your opponent. So, if possible,
offer to review each slow game afterwards with your opponent
in a ‘post-mortem’ and learn as much as you can (Tip #18).
Tip 71
*Top-10 Tip*
Do not worry about your rating; work on your playing strength.
Ratings are a wonderful invention. The Elo system and its derivatives have expanded well beyond the chess world and are used not only in other games of skill, but even to predict and gamble on high stakes sporting events. The accuracy of the ratings makes them simultaneously attractive and yet dangerously seductive. I think we have all heard stories of players who have become more fascinated with their rating than they sometimes are in the actual playing of their chess games. The rating ‘game’ becomes a game unto itself.
Your rating is only a shadow of your playing strength
. Players who make draw offer decisions based on rating rather than ‘how much can I learn?’ factors are almost always misguided. My students who instead would play anyone anywhere and did not offer or accept ‘preserve rating’ draws learned fastest.
Consider the following ‘clone’ thought experiment: Suppose there is a scholastic player rated 1800 who does not like playing lower-rated players because he might lose rating points. Suppose we clone him in January, and further suppose he continues to avoid lower rated scholastic players while his clone plays in several scholastic tournaments versus a bunch of up-and-coming 1300 and 1400 players, who beat him more than their ratings would indicate, dropping his rating to 1700. Meanwhile the original non-clone sits at home and studies chess, but plays no instructive games.
If they both enter the same section of the World Open in July, who would you think would perform better? My money is on the 1700 clone rather than the higher-rated 1800 original; the clone is the better player, despite his lower rating. His experience includes learning from his losses, which the original lacks.
Sure, if you are 1800 and offered the choice of playing in one of two events on the same weekend, choosing the one with more challenging opponents – within reason – is the better choice. But to not play at all to protect your rating when there is only one event is likely the wrong choice. If your playing strength does not deteriorate and you have a terrible event and lose rating points and become underrated, it is not a disaster; just play some more and your rating will return to the level of your playing strength!
When entering events or especially when considering offering or accepting draw offers, it is usually best if you make the decisions as if ratings did not exist. I cannot tell you how many times a student has accepted a draw in a superior endgame where they could only lose if they started putting pieces en prise, with the explanation something like “They were higher rated so I was happy to get the draw.” I will bet they would not have said that if ratings did not exist and they just considered the position on the board!
If you are one of the top players of your category and you need a certain rating by a certain time to qualify for an invitational event or a FIDE title, it might make sense to ‘time’ your participation to ensure your rating qualification. But for the average player, such qualification opportunities are rare and quite the exception. One possibility is players who improved greatly during the pandemic by playing online and then are underrated for over-the-board play and want to take advantage of big money events like the World Open, which in turn had to consider some caveats to address those exceptional issues. Nevertheless, manipulating your rating – rather than just improving – is rarely required.
Do things that will improve your playing strength and your rating will surely follow.
Tip 72
Play as if the rating system had never been invented.
This tip applies to a variety of situations, including:
• Deciding which events to play.
• Deciding whether to accept or decline a draw.
• Choosing between moves, or the type of game you want to play.
• How to treat your opponents.
I once had a fairly strong student who was playing a 1900 player (at the time higher than his rating, but not by so much), and my student was ahead a rook. There was still a lot of play left in the game, but objectively it was a trivial win. His opponent could have resigned, except for the number of pieces on the board. Yet my student timidly offered a draw, which was immediately and happily accepted. When asked why he offered the draw, my student mumbled something about his opponent having vague threats, but he was just happy to get his five rating points (which would have been more like 20+ if he had won). If there was no rating system, there is no way my student would have offered a draw in such a clearly winning situation.
Another young, promising student did something similar versus a wise, older and higher-ranked player: he offered a draw in a position where he was winning so easily that it was more a question of whether the opponent should resign than whether a draw should be offered or accepted. Amazingly, his opponent did something I have never seen before or since – he declined the draw and resigned! He then told my student something like: “I could not in good conscience accept a draw in such a losing position and you should not have offered it. If you offer draws in winning positions that is not the way to become a strong player.”
These are just a couple of many, many examples of how players let ratings negatively affect their actions. Yes, there are the rare cases where a certain result or rating level is needed to achieve a norm or an invitation to a future event, but these are few and far between compared to the everyday actions players take which detract from both their results and their possibilities for learning and improving.
I suggest instead that in most cases the proper action can be made by simply eliminating the rating consideration from the decisions. Play in the events or sections that are the most fun or offer the most opportunity for learning. Offer draws if the position indicates that a draw is the likely result and you are wasting time and learning nothing by continuing. This results in another one of my tips (#19):
Think of a draw offer as an offer to remain ignorant of what you would have learned in the rest of the game.
This last suggestion must be good, as I have seen at least one other author quote it!
Tip 73
In order to become a rating, you must lose your fear of players of that rating.
From teaching over 1,000 students, I can say that some of the most common problems new players have are due to the rating system and one of those is fear of players with ratings a little above theirs. If the rating system had never existed, I don’t see how any of those fears would have occurred.
When I find a player extraordinarily afraid of players just above him/her, I ask “According to the rating system how many points should you score in a 100-game match? Usually they guess a number much lower than the expected value of 36 (a win equals one point, a draw half), due to their fear and actual results. But what happens when this fear exists is a ‘self-fulfilling prophecy’ that they do not do as well.
I suggest to such players that, whenever possible, they do not try to discover their opponent’s rating before each game. That way they can treat everyone the same and play with less fear against those that are higher. I have a couple of anecdotal stories, not necessary to relate here, which indicate that not knowing the opponent’s rating, when possible, usually works very well.
So long as the fear exists, even if the player gets stronger their self-fulfilling prophecy makes rating gains more difficult. There is also the rating factor. For a USCF 1400 player, a draw versus a player 1500 gains about four points, but a win gets about 20, a 5-1 ratio (compared to the 2-1 ratio on the scoreboard of a full point versus a half).
If you are afraid of players rated higher than yourself and get good positions, but offer draws out of fear that you might lose the game, it makes it much more difficult to gain rating points. It especially makes it difficult to take advantage of the USCF ‘bonus’ points, when established players have a much better than expected result, because scoring well above your expected score usually requires at least one, if not more, wins versus higher-rated opponents in an event.
Obviously once the fear goes away, it is much easier psychologically to play for wins, and to achieve them. That why I tell players that have certain rating goals that if they continue to fear players at their goal level, it makes that goal much harder to achieve, even when their playing strength improves.
Tip 74
Some positive chess attributes do not require you to be a strong or experienced player; it just requires players of all ages to act like a ‘wise adult’.
This tip is the psychological follow-up to the ‘try your best’ Tip #2. Imagine you are a track coach and some of your runners are practicing not by running around the track, as they are supposed to, but instead leisurely walking. It would not be difficult for you to figure out that you need to tell them to run as directed or else they will not be long for the track team.
But it is interesting that many lower-rated players who come to me for lessons make many of their mistakes simply by not trying their best, for a variety of reasons, many of them psychological. Higher-rated players rarely have this problem since it would be very difficult for them to have become higher rated if they did not try hard on every move. After all, it only takes one bad move to lose a game, so it only makes sense to be vigilant on every move.
Here is a good example from a recent game by an adult student. He is playing a slow game, has plenty of time on his clock (I think about 19 minutes), and he is ahead the exchange for a pawn in the endgame. Can you find his best move?
Black to play
Black can obtain a winning position only by 1...Ra4!. Then if White tries to guard the pawn, say by 2.Bd5, the attack on the pinned pawn 2...b5 gives Black a winning advantage. This is not trivially easy, but it is not all that difficult, either. We could excuse a lower-rated player for missing this, but only under the condition they reasonably tried to find their best move.
But my student said he took seven seconds(!) to play 1...Rc3 when after 2.Bd5 he is not winning. Not only did my student not win, he actually lost this game and, thanks to the increment, still had about 19 minutes left on his clock when he resigned.
Part of my student’s problem was that he started to play much faster when he got less than 20 minutes on his clock, even though he had plenty of time, a nice increment, and the game was nearing the end. It was a form of psychological panic partly due to inexperience, but also due to lack of reasonable judgment of his time situation, which was by no means objectively difficult. He did not need to be a strong player to take more than seven seconds on a critical move when he had almost twenty minutes on his clock plus an increment; he just had to act like a ‘wise adult’, take a deep breath, and realize he had more time to think.
To reiterate a point from Tip #2, I tell my students that the first step in improvement is to try your best, not playing too fast or too slow, on every move. If they do not, that ‘masks’ other things they might do to improve. It is somewhat like learning to be good at reading is a strong prerequisite for other disciplines, so you can study them more efficiently. In chess,
trying your best on each move is the prerequisite.
An important point is that you don’t have to be a strong player or have excellent chess skills to both understand issues like ‘trying your best on every move’ or ‘when something critical is happening, be careful’ and trying to implement them each and every game. It does take willpower, consistency, and perseverance. I call issues that do not require high chess skills or knowledge the ‘wise adult syndrome’ because those who don’t do them suffer consequences that could be alleviated with just some wise decisions most adults could implement with that understanding and willpower. This leads us to Tip #75...
Tip 75
Try Your Best or Resign – do not have other ‘gears’.
When I first started improving as a player, it eventually dawned on me that there were only two gears to play chess: try your best or resign
.
This is a follow-up tip relating to the previous tip, about not needing to be a strong player to play wisely.
I would like to relate a story of how dramatic that difference can be between a 2200+ player and a class player, in this case two 1700s. About 25 years ago I was watching a game in the Under-1800 Section of the World Open, which was then held at the Adam’s Mark Hotel, about three miles down the road from my home.
I did not know either of the players I was watching. They were both about college age and rated about 1700. The round had been going on for more than four hours, so they were in the second time control (40 moves in two hours followed by sudden death in one hour), around move 44. Both had about 50 minutes left to complete the game. They had reached a king and pawn endgame where one side was up a pawn; I think it was Black. Let us assume Black had five pawns and White had four. If I remember correctly, Black had the more active king, but White had some compensating advantages in the pawn structure.
It was a pretty difficult position; it looked at first glance that Black should win (as is usual in king and pawn endgames ahead a pawn and with many pawns on the board), but it wasn’t trivially easy.
First, I looked at the plan where Black would bring his king to the queenside and attack the b-pawn. Passive defense by White was clearly hopeless, so he would have to make it a race by bringing his king to the kingside. I counted the race and apparently both sides would queen, but Black would remain a pawn ahead in a queen and pawn endgame.
Then I calculated what would happen if the black king stayed on the kingside. Again, that was murky as it would not be easy to create a winning passed pawn, due to the pawn structure. It was not easy to calculate exactly what would happen. Even if I could calculate what the eventual stability of the kingside would be in that line, Black’s work would not be done, as he would have to calculate whether staying kingside first and then later trying to go queenside was better than just going to queenside right away. There were several possible alternatives; too much for me to calculate in a few minutes. I still felt that with careful play Black was probably winning.
While I was calculating Black’s 44th move, an amazing thing happened: the players both played many moves extremely quickly and White resigned! Black had immediately moved his king to the queenside and White’s monarch had hopelessly followed, resulting in inevitable defeat.
After the game I asked the players if they would like to review the game with me in the Skittles room. They accepted and when we got there, I introduced myself as a master and asked them to set up the position on the 44th move, which they gladly did, happy to get some masterly help. I then proceeded to show them my analysis: why immediately bringing Black’s king to the queenside, as in the game, was problematic and how White could also queen in that race. But I also showed them that the other lines were not immediately decisive, either, and that it was going to take some effort for Black to force a win.
Obviously both players were relatively careful and slow: both had taken about 130 minutes for their first 43 moves. Therefore, I submitted the question I had been waiting to ask: “You guys are apparently careful because you both used over two hours, but how could you play out such a critical king and pawn endgame so fast? After all, the decision of what to do on move 44 was not at all easy and I was unable to come to a clear decision just about that one move – while you were playing out the entire remainder of the game!”
Black’s answer: “I thought I was winning and that it was trivial so I just played it quickly, expecting to win. White’s answer: “At that point I thought I was dead lost, but rather than resign, I thought I would play a few moves quickly just to see what would happen.”
Very reasonable and understandable answers, but not ones you would get from many extremely strong players. The 1700 players were using a gear I just do not have: ‘play fast and see what happens’. Another common bad gear that lower-rated players have is ‘I am winning easily so I will play really fast and show everyone how smart I am.’
My only two gears are (i.) Take your time and try your best on every move or (ii.) Resign. If these players had taken their time, they might have realized the position was not so clear or easy as they thought it was; for example, maybe with some care White could have drawn against the line Black quickly chose.
Sure, if I am ahead a queen and my opponent is not resigning, I am not going to take five minutes on every move; in some easily winning positions any careful, reasonable move will do. But, in those cases, I am still trying my best because I am being careful and making sure my move wins 100% with no possibility of stalemate, etc.
Trying your best does not mean always playing very slowly. In a speed game, playing slowly is not your best speed.
Playing your best suggests taking a reasonable amount of time given both the criticality of the position and the current time/clock situation.
If your move is forced, then taking extra time to see what might happen next can be wasteful, and not the best strategy.
Bottom line: If you want to know one difference between many 1700 players and most 2200 players, this story is worth remembering.
Tip 76
Always play with confidence, aggression, and respect for your opponent’s moves and ideas.
This is one of my favorite (and personally created) suggestions. It primarily applies toward the start of the game; if you are dead lost, then it makes less sense. As will be discussed in Tip #80, chess is not the type of game where playing conservatively (as opposed to safely) is the best way to win and improve. Chess is a mental sport, so your mental state has a very large effect on your playing strength.
If you think you are going to lose, that usually becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy
(Tip #73).
I like to tell the story of the first time I was paired with a master in a slow-rated event. I had been playing tournaments for 18 months and had a USCF rating of 1676. The tournament was a one-section open event and of the 102 players I was rated 52nd (in the first round player rated #1 plays #52; #2 plays #53, #3 plays #54, etc). Rating were lower in those days, so there was only one active master in the Philadelphia area, NM Sergei Goregliad, and I was paired against him, rated 1676 to Sergei’s 2242.
When my friend Lester Shelton and I saw the first round pairings, Les exclaimed “What a shame! If you had been rated a few points higher, you would have played an unrated, but now you have the play the master and he is going to kill you!” I calmly replied, “Les, I can’t worry about that. I am just going to do what I always do: look at the board, take my time, and make the best move I can. If I lose – and I probably will because he is a master – I will still look myself in the mirror and think ‘I did the best I could’.”
Notice although I estimated I probably would lose (if I had to bet!), I was not pessimistic at all; I was not afraid of the master nor afraid of losing. When I played, I felt fine, pretty much exactly how I felt in many other games I played against strong opposition. How did the game turn out?
Dan Heisman – Sergei Goregliad
Liberty Bell Open 1968
Dutch Defence
1.d4 f5 2.g3 g6 3.Bg2 Nf6 4.c4 Bg7 5.Nc3 0-0 6.Nh3 d6 7.0-0 c6 8.Ng5 e5 9.dxe5 dxe5 10.e4 h6 11.Nf3 Qc7 12.Nh4 Kh7 13.exf5 gxf5 14.Qc2 e4 15.Bf4 Qf7 16.Rad1 Na6 17.Ne2 Nb4 18.Qb3 Nd3 19.f3 Be6 20.fxe4 Bxc4 21.Qc2 Nb4 22.Qd2 Rad8 23.Qxb4 Bxe2 24.Rxd8 Bxf1 25.Rxf8 Bxf8
White to play after 25...
B
xf8
26.Qa5 Bb5 27.Nxf5 Qc4 28.Qc7+ Kg8 29.h3 Qf7 30.Nxh6+ Bxh6 31.Qxf7+ Kxf7 32.Bxh6 Bd3 33.e5 Nd7 34.Bf4 Ke6 35.Bf1 Bc2 36.Bc4+ Kf5 37.e6 Nf6 38.e7 Kg6 39.Be5 Ne8 40.Kf2 b5 41.Bg8 c5 42.h4 Bd1 43.Ke3 Bh5 44.Kf4 Nf6 45.Be6 Kh6 46.Bxf6 Bg6 47.Bd7 Bf7 48.Bxb5 Kg6 49.Be5 Kh7 50.e8=Q 1-0
I won! And six months later I was paired with Sergei again and he was out for revenge, but I won again and proved my first win was no fluke. After the second event where I beat Sergei, my rating soared to over 1900 after two years of play.
We have covered confidence and aggression, but what about ‘and respect for your opponent’s moves and ideas’? This primarily applies when playing inferior opponents. I often hear something like “I played fast because he was playing fast” or “I did not think he would see my threat” or “I was not paying attention so I missed what he was trying to do.”
Many players get overconfident when they get paired with clearly weaker opposition. But you don’t want to play down to the level of the opposition. In chess strong players can make bad mistakes (admittedly less frequently, and weak players can make strong moves (some intentional, some not!). Therefore, do not be surprised if you ‘put your head in the mouth’ of a weak player and he bites it off!
Take all opponent’s moves seriously and the first two questions to ask are:
• ‘Is that move safe?’
• ‘What are
all
the important/dangerous things that move does?’ (Tip #56)
Tip 77
Make the work fun. If you cannot, it will not help you nearly as much.
Over the years, I have had several students tell me something analogous to “I don’t find the homework you have suggested fun, but I am doing it anyway since I believe you that you say doing it will help me improve.”
My answer is always something like: “Never do homework that is not fun. Stop as soon as it ceases to be fun and tell me, and we will try to find out why it’s not fun and maybe find some ways to make it more fun. But in my experience, students who do homework that is not fun for them at best find it gives them diminishing returns and, over time, is not sustainable. Chess is
not like work or even schoolwork; it is a hobby and if the work is not fun, in the long run you won’t get much benefit from it.”
As an example of making the work more fun, assume the student does not find reading instructive anthology game books (game books written for instruction as opposed to other purposes, like historical and/or best game collections). Then I might ask “What about the reading the games don’t you find fun?”
One of the answers I get is: “I can’t stand reading all those side variations” or “I can do the main game, but I don’t have a second board to do the side variations and if I do them on the main board I have difficulty getting back to the main game position when I finish with the side variation.” Fair enough. But then I ask...
“When I started out and I read about 2,000 annotated games in my first three years of competitive play, which took me from unrated to expert (2000 USCF), what percentage of the side variations do you think I played out?”
Students’ guesses on this vary, but my estimate is I only read about 15% of the side variations. Then I ask, “Which side variations do you think were the ones I read?” The answer is “the ones where I was very curious as to what was to be learned from playing out the side variation or ones that looked like the most fun.” For example, if Alekhine wrote “This blunder lost immediately, but if my opponent had played correctly I would have won anyway, as follows...” and then he gave a two-page analysis, I would often skip this, thinking ‘I believe you, Alexander!’
Then I am often hit with the crucial question, “But if you skip those variations, won’t you learn less than if you had read them?” When someone asks this question, my first thought is the conversation between Professor Barnhart (the Einstein type) to alien Klaatu in the original
The Day the Earth Stood Still
movie:
Barnhardt:
“Have you tested this theory?”
Klaatu: “I find it works well enough to get me from one planet to another.”
So, my temptation is to say, “I found it worked well enough to get me from beginner to expert in three years and among the Top 25 Juniors in the United States even though I did not start playing seriously until I was 16 years old!”
But instead, I usually make the key point: “We are not trying to maximize the amount of unit learning you get from one game or one annotation; we are trying to maximize the amount of learning you get per unit time!” (This discussion was also covered in detail in Tip #17, which was not about fun, but just about learning per unit time.) In other words, if I get less out of each game, but could read that many more games and different authors, by maximizing my ‘fun’, I would read longer and learn more. It worked!
Let’s give another example about adding fun. Suppose you are not great at basic tactics and in doing them repetitively so you can recognize them faster and more accurately (a goal; Tip #91), you find the repetition tedious and not fun.
One sure solution would be to stop and give up! But maybe we can find a work-around that would make it more fun. If you are goal-oriented or like personal improvement statistics, you could either time yourself for problem sets and/or keep careful statistics about how well you did on each pass through the problems and compare your statistics to some improvement goals that you set. If instead you stop, this leads to another *Tip Alert*:
Perseverance is an important chess skill.
The ‘Tortoise and the Hare’ fable applies here. Players who can make things fun not only last longer, but eventually, on average, do much better. Making your study into a game mirrors a modern work-ethic model that says most people learn/perform better when the learning/performing is in a game-like situation.
Still another ‘make it fun’ solution by some students is to take a fixed problem set (like Bain’s
Chess Tactics for Students
or Giannatos’s
Everyone’s First Chess Workbook
) and make them into flashcards. This makes it more fun for some because they are not doing the problems in the same order and by removing them from the book form hides the tactical motif (pin, double attack, removal of the guard, etc), and makes it more challenging.
Sometimes the challenge of making helpful work more fun is meta-fun in itself!
Tip 78
Everyone has real barriers to improvement, but work to break down the artificial barriers.
For almost everyone (including almost all the readers of this book), chess is a hobby, and hobbies usually must take a lower priority to life’s more pressing needs: family, work, school, food, shelter, exercise, etc. Those often pose real barriers to something you might want to do in the hobby, like attend a tournament, go to a club regularly, play more slow time control games, or whatever.
However, when discussing issues with students what would help them improve their game, they are often resistant for reasons that I would categorize as artificial barriers:
• “I can’t play yet – I’m not good enough.”
• “I can’t play online – opponents cheat.”
• “I can’t play over-the-board – some opponents are rude.”
• “I can’t go to the club – they mostly play fast games.”
• “I can’t read
Pawn Power in Chess
because Kmoch uses archaic terminology.”
• “I can’t read that chess book because it’s in descriptive notation.”
• “I can’t play slow games online because no one will play with me.”
The list goes on and on! In each of these cases the student may have a legitimate point, but in none of the cases are these barriers impossible – or even difficult – to overcome, sometimes with just a little willpower or ingenuity.
In my Novice Nook column for
Chess Café
, ‘Breaking Down Barriers’, I wrote that we can segment the world’s population (and thus chess players too) into two types: Those that go out of their way to destroy artificial barriers that bar their success or happiness, and those that, due to some fear or resistance, take time to erect such barriers in many aspects of their life.
After that column was published one of my former students, a retired lawyer in Florida, dropped me an email that said (I paraphrase): “Dan, that was the best column you ever wrote. It applies not just to chess, but to many things in life. Long after you and I are both gone they will be pointing to that column and saying what great advice it is.”
I am not going to repeat the entire column here, but you already have a gist of what it says. Sometimes to get ahead in life, or get what you want, you must overcome these obstacles that seemingly block your way. You often hear it on television when they interview a famous person or someone wins an award and they say something like: “They told me I couldn’t do it; they said I was too x and too y, but I did it anyway. Don’t let anyone get in the way of your dreams. If there is something you want to do, go out there and find a way to do it!”
These people succeeded despite the adversities and naysayers, and not everyone who overcomes adversities and naysayers gets rich or famous. But if you let these barriers stop you, then you most likely will not achieve your goals.
Let’s take the objection about Kmoch’s archaic terminology, like ‘leucopenia’ for weak light squares and
‘
melanopenia’ for weak dark squares. He also has terms that have been superseded like ‘dispersion’, which we now call too many pawn islands or ‘liberating levers’, now known as pawn breaks or break moves.
When I read
Pawn Power in Chess
, none of this bothered me. I was not interested in what he called weak squares; I was interested in what weak squares were, how to recognize them, avoid them, and take advantage of them. I knew there was not going to be a quiz at the end of the book; I also had started to realize that some of these terms had not caught on among the chess world, so when I attended my club or tournaments no one was going to use them or expect me to know them. So his terminology was just not an issue; I ignored most of the terms while absorbing Kmoch’s wonderfully instructive discussion of them.
Imagine my shock many years later when I became a full-time instructor and many of my intermediate students told me they had to put down the book (
Pawn Power in Chess
is not yet appropriate for low-rated players who don’t consistently make safe moves or recognize when opponent’s safe moves allow easy tactics). When I asked why they could not read it, those who objected never cited any lack of good instruction; it was almost always because they could not get past the same archaic nomenclature that I completely ignored.
For me it was a barrier that I could ignore, and learn; for them, it was a barrier to prevent learning. When I questioned these students on why they could not just ignore the nomenclature and learn from the rest of the material, they just felt like they couldn’t read it. Very few of those, after discussing it with me, were able to overcome their objection; they let the barrier remain instead of finding ways of knocking it down.
This is just one small illustration of a barrier, but I think most of readers will be able to think of examples of their own. How we deal with these barriers will go a long way toward determining how much progress you can make, and how quickly and easily that will be.
Tip 79
Sometimes learning to be more consistent is more helpful than learning more about your opening repertoire.
One advantage I have teaching over 1,000 students one-on-one privately is seeing which issues and problems are the most prevalent, which are the most difficult to overcome, etc. Just as learning to find better moves by analysis and evaluation is paramount, and knowledge of openings, endgames, tactical patterns and principles is essential, being able to apply what you know consistently can be a major factor in a player’s ability to play well.
In a related example, I once asked players on Twitter “If you made a knowledge mistake, was it more likely something you did not know that caused the mistake, or something you did know that you failed to apply, or applied incorrectly?” The overwhelming majority voted for the latter. In other words, they often knew what to do, but in crucial, critical situations they often did not consistently apply that knowledge, whether it was to ‘have a better idea’ or just forgetting.
There are many reasons a player might be inconsistent (and just as many different ‘fixes’ that might be helpful):
• Bad time management – playing too fast or too slow for the entire time control, or playing too fast or slow according to a position’s criticality can cause major inconsistencies in the qualities of a player’s moves. Play too fast and it adds a large amount of randomness and error possibilities. Play too slow and later in the game you will either lose on time or be forced to play too fast for the situation, and ‘magically’ your play will deteriorate badly as the game reaches the latter stages.
• If you have a poor thought process, that creates a ‘hit and miss’ quality to your play. On some moves you might ‘hit’ on a good idea, but then two moves later miss a simple, necessary continuation. Another example is when you settle for the first acceptable move you see; sometimes that may be best or close to best, but other times that will cause you to miss obvious (in retrospect) clearly better moves.
• Stamina and concentration go hand-in-hand. There are many factors that can cause a player to get tired and confused. The player might not have had sufficient rest before the game, may not have nourished properly during the game, might be in overall poor physical or mental health, or maybe played the game at an awkward time when they could not be at their physical and/or mental best.
• Another issue that affects consistency is the ability to deal with pressure, excitement, unexpected opponent’s moves (or interactions), and other factors that occur during a game. Occasionally a student will explain a hasty move by saying “I got excited because I thought I was winning/losing and therefore forgot to check if my move was safe” (or fill in the blank with another bad result like moved too fast or didn’t see his other threat).
There is no one ‘cure’ for these inconsistencies. The factors that cause them can be a single, identifiable problem (which may or may not be easy to fix), but more likely can be a combination of factors which need to be identified, possibly prioritized, and dealt with in a reasonable fashion (it can take time and effort!).
They always say it only takes one bad move to lose a game. In the same vein we have discussed how important it is to try your best on every move (Tip #2). One way to help achieve this and avoid the bad moves is to do what you have learned, and apply what you know consistently throughout the game.
No one said that being a good chess instructor is always easy! I guess if all we need do is teach someone a new line in the Caro-Kann that would be much simpler, but most players’ path to becoming a better player is usually more complex than just feeding them information.
Tip 80
The best way to get a draw against a higher-rated player is to play for a win and if you fail, you might get your draw.
This was one of the earliest pieces of advice I was given as a beginner. I thought it made sense then, and I still do.
Many players, when facing a higher-rated opponent, try to obtain a draw from the first move by playing passively and trading off the pieces. They figure if there are fewer pieces on the board, then they must be closer to an equal position with fewer winning chances for the better player. They also believe that playing passively avoids complications and gives the stronger player fewer opportunities to outplay them when things are more difficult to calculate. But this strategy of passive play and wanton trading is often misguided for the following reasons:
• Fewer pieces on the board does not always translate into fewer chances to lose. I have often seen lower-rated players get into somewhat equal endgames with one piece and several pawns (especially rook and pawns), and then force the trade of that piece, thinking that it gets them closer to a draw. Instead, it often lands them in a tricky king and pawn endgame where careful calculation is required and the stronger player out-calculates them and wins an otherwise possibly drawn endgame.
• Chess is not game where passive play translates into a better chance to draw. I like to tell the story of a time I played some skittles games against someone who did not know who I was. He played aggressively and fairly well, but I was too strong for him and won three hard-fought games in a row. Then a mutual friend advised him that he was playing the Philadelphia area champion and he challenged me to three more games. In these games he played much more ‘respectfully’ (passively) and I won all three much easier than I had when he had been aggressive and had been trying to win.
• When someone tries to trade just to trade, a good player can make sure that does not happen unless the trade is at least equal or better for him. As one grandmaster once wrote: “There’s no such thing as a fair trade”, meaning in almost all trades of equal valued pieces, it is at least slightly favorable for one side or the other. The stronger player can take advantage of the weaker one who is too eager to trade and, in doing so, obtain some advantage.
All of this backs up the advice: Happy with a drawn result? Then play to win!
Tip 81
Almost everyone is a stranger the first time they enter a chess club.
The ideas behind this tip include:
• Don’t be afraid of going to a club where you don’t know anyone; that’s the way most of us start, and you have to start somewhere.
• Chess clubs are great places to meet new people.
• Getting better at something requires a modicum of proactive involvement and overcoming inertia.
• When you do go to a club for the first time, be prepared to deal with strangers and new circumstances, but be optimistic.
Of the above, the two that stand out to me, from my experience and talking with others, are overcoming inertia and being proactive.
I selected overcoming inertia because when I interview a new student and ask if they are a member of a local chess club, I sometimes get answers like “I don’t know; I mostly play online”, or “Yes, but I have never/rarely attended”, or “There is a club, but I’m not good enough to go there yet.” Humans are creatures of habit and if your habit is to not attend the local club, it often takes a little encouragement from a friend or coach to get a player to even attempt to attend.
Being proactive is important. Some clubs have active officers, but often a club is more informal. More than once a student has told me “I can’t play slow games there – they only want to play blitz.” If your club only plays blitz and you are looking for some slow games, you can walk out forever, but that won’t help. Less dramatic but also non-optimal is to ask the club officers to find you a slow game. I think the best approach is to ask the officers if they would not mind if you organized or found your own slow games among the attendees. Perhaps they have a website where they can put a note that a player is looking for some slow chess opponents. Almost all clubs will let you make an announcement that you are looking for slow games; you can ask if anyone is interested. Again, this type of proactive approach is likely the most productive
When I ask a student if he/she inquired if they could make an announcement that they were looking for opponents who would play slow games, the answer is almost always they did not. Then I suggest that the answer they receive might surprise them; someone might reply that they had greatly hoped to find someone else to play a more serious game. It doesn’t hurt to ask!
Until the advent of the internet, clubs, more than tournaments, were the lifeblood of chess play. In order to find others who enjoyed your hobby, it made sense to see if there was a local club where you could find a game. However, some of my students have been hesitant to go to a local club, and not just because of the pandemic. I hear concerns like “They are mostly unfriendly”, or “I want to play slow chess and all they do is play blitz”, or “I’m not good enough; I want to study more so when I go I won’t lose.”
All these concerns are understandable, but these barriers most likely can be broken. Some clubs are proactive about welcoming new players, but others have a more laissez-faire attitude. I suggest newcomers be a little proactive if they need to be; it is intimidating being the only stranger, but sometimes a little friendly conversation will help break the ice.
Eventually, if you want the club to do activities that suit you, you can run for a club office, such as Activities Director or even President. They are usually glad to have your help!
Tip 82
Learn to deal with difficult opponents; if necessary, get the aid of the tournament director/arbiter.
I have run into several students who say they do not want to play over-the-board (OTB), or stopped doing so, because they ran into opponents who were not nice (to put it politely). The problem is that these are some of the very same students who say their goal is to one day become an expert (USCF 2000-2199) or master.
There is clearly a disconnect because at the current time (it could change!), these titles are only granted for serious, slow OTB play. In other words, these players’ goals are not possible if they refuse to play OTB. Tilt! Just as a golfer cannot become a good player just by going to the driving range, but must learn things like course management from extensive playing experience, an aspiring chess player must learn to deal with a variety of off-the-board issues, not the least of which is dealing with unpleasant opponents.
Unpleasant opponents come in a variety of sizes and types. Many of my adult students go into ‘tilt’ mode any time they are paired with someone below age 13, no matter how pleasant or well-behaved these youngsters are. I tell them, “Don’t worry about what your opponent looks like, their age, height, or whatever; look at the moves they play on the board and respond accordingly no matter who or what made the move.” To be fair, some youngsters can’t sit still or talk inappropriately, but, with some exceptions, you have to deal with them much the same way you would deal with an adult doing those same things.
If you have an opponent who is violating the rule ‘you are not allowed to purposely disturb your opponent’, if what they are doing is not malicious or intentional, you can begin by pleasantly asking them to stop. But in the long run at some point you may need to stop the clock (assuming it is your turn), get the tournament director (TD), explain the situation, let them investigate and hear the other side of the story, and take appropriate action.
If the TD feels that your complaint is legitimate, he will (or should) take increasingly strong steps to ensure the opponent stops bothering you. Once in a great while, you may even have to go over the TD’s head to get a senior or regional director to take action. However, if you don’t complain and try to take matters into your own hands, unpredictable things might happen which can strongly affect the outcome of your game and maybe even your willingness to continue playing.
Every TD has a myriad of stories along these lines; as a player and senior TD for over 30 years, I have my share. At the World Open one year there was a college-aged player who was clearly trying to disturb and intimidate his opponents. He was paired with one of my younger students, who was only about 12 at the time. My student properly complained to the TD, who misunderstood and thought my student was being overly sensitive. The TD improperly told my student to not worry about it and try to ignore his opponent, not realize the opponent’s purposeful and malicious intentions. If I recall correctly, my son Delen, then a teenager, realized what was happening, grabbed a chair and sat next to my student to try to support him, witness further infractions, and send a message to the opponent that someone was watching his unethical tricks.
The next round the college-aged provocateur was paired with an experienced Russian-speaking opponent and tried the exact same antics. The Russian was not taking any of that and went to the TD and properly demanded the TD take appropriate action to stop his opponent’s misdeeds. By now the TD realized his previous mistake and the malicious intent of the Russian’s opponent and assigned not one, but two assistant TDs to sit and watch the game.
When the players got into time trouble the college kid purposely placed his piece in-between two squares and hit his clock. His Russian opponent did not move, but properly said “please place your piece on a square” and repressed the clock. The college kid did not adjust his piece, and instead again hit the clock saying “your move!” The Russian calmly hit the clock once again, indicating he was not going to move until the opponent made a clearly legal move. But again his opponent did not adjust his piece, but hit the clock right back a second time. At that point one of the TDs got up and stopped the clock, pointed to the Russian, and understandably ruled “you win!”
Normally the punishment must fit the crime and awarding a forfeit of the game is a big punishment. But here the forfeit was fully justified as this latest incident was just the culmination of what the college kid had been pulling all day. I would not have been surprised if this type of behavior had also resulted in a temporary or even permanent ban of this player from all future events held by that organizer.
It is worth awarding kudos to his opponents for not putting up with the poor behavior, not trying to start a fight or become mentally disturbed, but rather calmly turning the situation over to the TD. The TD doesn’t get as high marks for his failure to initially comprehend the seriousness of the allegations. In the end justice is not always meted perfectly, but the rules and the system are set up to make the event fun and fair and enjoyable for all. We do want you to come back!
Finally, it is also worth noting that online behavior is often worse than OTB behavior because online players can hide behind the online anonymity and the lack of physical retribution. Therefore, it is a little ironic that some players who play only online would be afraid to play OTB due to possible bad behavior!
Tip 83
Like poker, chess opponents often have ‘tells’ that may give you information about what you should do.
Chess is considered a game of ‘complete information’ and poker is not, so it is well-known that ‘tells’ in poker help give players more information. But in chess it is also possible to gather additional information, usually from the time management of a player or from some aspects of their move.
Let’s consider how this type of information might be obtained and interpreted:
A player blitzes out a bunch of opening moves and then slows down – this slowing usually indicates that they are usually ‘out of their book’ and no longer know exactly what to do. This could be a ‘fake’ and they just want you to think that, or they know what to do but they are no longer 100% sure. But, in most cases, it tells you how much they probably know about the opening.
A non-beginning player puts a piece en prise
or seemingly makes a terrible move – they are likely telling you that capturing that piece is probably poison, but, on the other hand, the move just might be a blunder. Either way it tells you your decision about whether to take or not is critical, so be careful!
A player takes unreasonably long on several non-critical moves early in the game – they are likely an opponent who plays too slowly and gets into unnecessary time pressure; therefore, a game that lasts many moves might be to your advantage (often more so than creating complications; Tip #84).
A player takes much longer on a move than you think they should – they might be contemplating some type of complicated maneuver or maybe the issues your previous made are more difficult to meet than you thought they were.
A player moves consistently too fast for the situation – they are probably playing Hope Chess and not really calculating whether their moves are safe, so be aware of possible opportunities. On the other hand, do not get overconfident and assume their moves cannot be any good; many of my students have lost games underestimating the quality of their opponent’s ‘too fast’ moves!
Of course, some ‘tells’ are more blatant than others. Garry Kasparov used to take off his wristwatch at the start of games and, if he achieved a winning position, he would ostentatiously put it back on, sending a ‘subtle’ message to his opponent!
Tip 84
Two mistakes commonly made when the opponent is short on time and you are not are: (i.) playing fast also, so they do not have time to think, and (ii.) unnecessarily complicating. Both seem ‘good’ for you, but
not
doing so is often even
more
beneficial for you!
Not all chess decisions are ‘zero-sum’. For example, if you have three candidate moves A, B, and C and you analyze A and B and don’t like them, you can’t automatically play C because it must be better – it could be much worse! This reasoning is analogous to the idea that complicating and playing fast when your opponent is short on time and you are not isn’t the best strategy. The argument in favor of doing so seems reasonable:
• If you complicate, you have extra time to figure out the complications (this may even be a great strategy if you are losing, but if you are not...).
• If you play fast even though you have a lot of time, your opponent who is short on time cannot even use your time to think, and is forced to play quick, less optimal moves.
I see players, even some experienced, strong players, use these two strategies all the time when their opponents are short on time. But since chess is not a zero-sum game, just because either of the arguments in favor of doing these strategies seems good, does not make them optimal is most situations. Let’s examine each strategy in turn:
Complicating when the opponent is short on time
If you have lots of time and your opponent has very little and you unnecessarily complicate just because of your opponent’s time situation, you are creating positions where either side can go heavily wrong much more easily. But you were
already
in a position where your opponent could go wrong much more easily due to his shortness of time. This has the bad effects of also increasing your mistakes (although with your extra time there should be fewer), and also shortening the game (since the position has a higher error rate).
But consider the following: suppose you are playing with a 10-second increment, it is move 25, your opponent has three minutes remaining and you have 30 minutes. You have two choices: complicate and get an explosive game that likely will be decided by the 35th move or just play solid chess where the game is could last 60 or 70 moves. Both are good for you because you have more time to navigate, but which is better? If you’ve played many endgames, you know they are full of critical moves which require careful calculation; by that time your opponent will likely be playing on the increment. Your advantage of not complicating (assuming those complications are not just tremendously in your favor, on the board) is much greater than your advantage of ‘fire on board’.
Playing fast when you have time but the opponent is short on time
Similarly, playing fast in your opponent’s time trouble gives both players less time to think. But unless you are losing, that throws away most of your advantage of having much more time. When your opponent analyzes on your time, it is not very efficient; unless your move is forced, he doesn’t know what you are going to play. Therefore, if you take your time, you are much more likely to analyze lines that could be played since you have a much better idea of what your move will be. If your move is forced, then play it quickly, of course. Otherwise use that time advantage!
There are circumstances when playing quickly if your opponent is low on time make sense, but many more where it does not. And in modern time controls, with big increments, it makes even less sense because your opponent will at least have that time on every move anyway. Just remember the logic that
just because something is beneficial for you still allows for the possibility the alternative could be even better, and if something is bad for you, it is possible the alternative could be even worse!
Tip 85
When you are way ahead it is a different game. In all sports, including chess, your strategy is much different when you are winning easily or losing badly than it would be if the game was close.
Tip #67 listed the six things I suggest a player do when winning easily. You can turn some of them around for what to do when losing badly. For example, if it is better for the player way ahead to keep the position clear and simple, then the player losing badly wants to make the position complicated (‘fire on board!’), because he/she has nothing to lose. In complications if the player who is losing makes a bad mistake they were lost anyway; but the player who is winning has everything to lose, so doesn’t want complicated decisions where they might lose material or get mated if they don’t calculate accurately.
Here is a recent position from a student’s game. He was White and ahead a piece. What should his strategy be?
White to play
White should castle kingside or even play 1.Kf1 and tuck the king away if he wants to keep his king’s rook on the semi-open h-file. Middlegames are usually much simpler when the kings are on the same side of the board. Instead, he felt like he had to keep the rook on the semi-open file and attack the black king; this is unnecessary since he is already winning! He could just play simply to trade the pieces.
Therefore, White played
1.0-0-0?
. This is just the opposite of what he should be trying to do. Now Black can attack on the queenside and make the game complicated. Luckily for White he won anyway, but I can tell you that many similar student games did not end so happily.
Since when way ahead you want to ‘keep the game simple’ (KISS principle), a follow-up to my comment above about king placement is (*Tip Alert!*):
If you win material before you castle, if possible and feasible, castle on the same side as your opponent
.
The reason is that castling opposite sides usually leads to unbalanced games where extra material is not as important, while same-side castling games, on average, tend to be more balanced and thus favor the player who has the extra material. If neither side has castled, castling first may be required for safety reasons, but it does give him/her the opportunity to then castle on the opposite side and get the unbalanced game they desire.
In the next example Black is ahead a piece and has unfortunately gone pawn hunting, allowing pressure on the d-file, but he can still win easily with some care:
Black to play
Black should just give White the e-pawn, e.g. 1...Rc8 (to get out of the pin) 2.Bxe5 Nxe5 3.Rxe5+ Kf8 and the extra material should win easily.
Instead, he guarded the e-pawn with
1...f6?
whereupon
2.Bc7
removed the guard on the knight and caused complications, which Black further misplayed and lost:
2...Rxf3 3.Bxd8 Kxd8??
(3...Nc5!)
4.Rxd7+
and already White is winning.
In our next position, both kings are exposed but it is Black’s turn and he is also ahead a knight. In such positions the most important issue is often keeping the initiative, while obviously not allowing the opponent to mate your king first.
Black to play
Black is ahead a knight and on the attack. He has mate in two with 1...b5+ 2.Kb3 Qb2#.
Instead he moved
1...Nb2+
, played quickly, if I remember correctly. After
2.Kb3
there are no big checks now so Black needs to be a little careful, and wasn’t with
2...Qd4??
.
White to play after 2...
Q
d4??
Instead of 2...Qd4, Black had to ‘think defense first’ and stop the checks with a move like 2...Qh2. Even 2...Qe2 would work. The problem with 2...Qd4 is that Black is not threatening anything, which gives White time for 3.Rh3+ Kg7 4.Qd8! winning. But White also missed his opportunity and first played
3.Qf8??
.
Black to play after 3.
Q
f8??
Black can now offer to sacrifice the knight and mate in 9(!) with
3...Qxd5+! 4.Kc2 (or 4.Kxb2 Qe5+ 5.d4 Qe2+ 6.Kb3 Rb1+ 7.Kc3 Rc1+ 8.Kb3 Qc2#) 4...Rf2+ 5.Kb1 Qh1+ 6.Rg1 Qxg1+ 7.Ka2 Na4+ 8.Kb3 Qd1+ 9.Kc4 Rf4+ 10.Kd5 Qxd3 11.Ke5 Qd4#. All this is beyond most players’ pay grade, but in any case Black must do something to at least stop 4.Rh3+ with a move like 3...Qh4, but he clearly played Hope Chess with
3...Qf2??
and resigned after the obvious
4.Rh3+
with mate to follow.
When ahead, my main advice is to ‘think defense first’, which has nothing to do with playing defensively or passively, but simply to make sure the things the opponent can do to get back in the game are first prevented before taking offensive action. If you have a million ways to win and only two ways to lose, it makes sense to first make sure those two cannot happen – preferably permanently – and then you will be pretty sure to stumble upon one of the million ways you can win.
Tip 86
When you are winning, do not worry about the little things
Consider the following two positions, comparing the two trade opportunities:
Black to play
In the position above Black is ahead a piece, so forcing the queen trade with 1...Qh6 is a great idea to remove the opponent’s future tactical counterplay, even if it gives Black doubled isolated h-pawns. This is also in accordance with one of my six principles on how to play when way ahead: Don’t worry about the little things.
Black to play
But in the second position the material is even, so 1...Qh6? to force the trade unnecessarily weakens Black’s position after 2.Qxh6 gxh6. The engine rates the position as much better for Black (about -0.8) after 1...Nc5
or 1...c6.
Instead, after 1...Qh6 2.Qxh6 gxh6, White has the double attack 3.Nb5 which, on top of the superior pawn structure, is completely winning.
In the following game from my formulative years, I was White and Black has just played
1...
N
d7
, threatening to trade the awkward knight for the strong bishop and also double my c-pawns. However, all these relatively small concerns pale in comparison to White winning the e-pawn:
White to play after 1...
N
d7
Even though I was the lower-rated player (but not for long!), I correctly understood the relative value of the respective threats, ignored Black’s ‘threat’ and played
2.Rxe6
. If I stop and save the bishop Black easily saves the e-pawn. However, after
2...Nxc5 3.dxc5 Rf4 4.R1e2
I dutifully and eventually collected the whole point.
Many readers rated over 1600 FIDE might think “This example is too easy!”, yet I teach players almost every day who often make this kind of mistake because there is a value of ‘one’ to win a pawn, but no value for them to compare if their opponent doubles their pawns and trades their struggling knight for a strong bishop.
Tip 58’s final diagram contained an example for this tip, too. White was ahead a pawn. After 1.Nc3? Nxc3? 2.bxc3 gives White doubled pawns, but since White was ahead and would be trading an inactive knight for a strong centralized one, White should not worry about the doubled pawns that much. Of course, it was the reply 1...Nb4, not 1...Nxc3 that made 1.Nc3 unsafe.
Tip 87
When you fail to see a combination/tactic (either for you or for your opponent), try to understand why you missed it, so you can improve in that area and be less likely to miss something similar in the future
.
One of the reasons I hear quite often on why someone lost a game is they “didn’t see” something: the bishop that took their queen or the combination their opponent played on them, or the combination they missed that would have won. But there are many reasons why you did not see something and, if you want to improve, simply writing it off as ‘I didn’t see it’ will not help minimizing your chances to have the same problem recur again.
Let’s list some of the most common reasons you might not see something and then briefly discuss what you might do to minimize recurrence:
1. Failed to look for
all
the opponent’s threats from his/her previous move.
2. Failed to look for the opponent’s forcing moves (checks, captures, and threats) that he/she could make
in reply
to your move (common!).
3. Failed to look for your own checks, captures, and threats.
4. Literally did not see the piece that moved before it made the move (board vision).
5. Looked for his/her checks, captures and threats, but didn’t calculate that one correctly (analysis error).
6. Played too fast for the situation (another common one).
7. Tried to recognize/solve a tactical pattern, but was unfamiliar/unsuccessful (lack of pattern recognition/tactical problem study).
8. Got tired or lost concentration and failed to do what you normally do.
Next, let’s briefly discuss/link what you can do to minimize each from happening:
#1 often occurs when you erroneously ask ‘Why did he/she make that move?’ instead of ‘What are
all
the things my opponent’s move does?’ (Tip #56). It only takes one reason you miss to lose the game, so finding just one reason for a move that has multiple purposes may be fatal.
#2 is the infamous Hope Chess – Tip #65.
#3 is partly covered in several other tips and many books on how to spot tactics like Hertan’s
Power Chess for Kids
or my
Back to Basics: Tactics
.
#4 – You can improve board vision in many ways, such as playing many long time control games slowly on each move, playing over 100s if not 1000s of annotated games, and/or doing ‘Board Vision Puzzles’ (Tips #104 and #109).
#5 is a big subject; there are entire books on proper analysis as well as several tips in this book.
#6 – For time management suggestions, see Tips #34 and #35.
#7 – The purpose of repetitious easy tactics is not just for solving, but for quick and accurate recognition (Tip #91).
#8 – Stamina is a big part of playing consistently in long games. Obviously physical activities that keep you in good shape help tremendously, but so does adequate rest (Tip #30).
To summarize, if you can break down ‘didn’t see’ to the root cause, that often helps you decide how you can work to minimize that problem in the future. Good luck!
Tip 88
Transition to psychological ‘Game Mode while filling in the top of your scoresheet.
Occasionally I get asked, “How can I start the game with better concentration? I sometimes start the game and make a mistake before I can get into the flow of the game.”
There is no sure answer for this issue and, obviously, some players are better than others at focusing when they need to. Even playing ‘book moves’ in the opening requires concentration to make sure you are really remembering the line you think you are, and don’t accidentally reach out and grab the wrong piece.
But I do have a suggestion that often helps: When playing over-the-board, transition from ‘life’ mode to ‘game’ mode by carefully filling out the top of your scoresheet(!).
Sometimes when members of our local club show me a scoresheet, the only information I see on the top of their sheet is White: “Me” versus Black: “Joe”. That is not very helpful to a third party trying to figure out what happened in the game, or to the player re-examining his scoresheet many years later.
Instead, I would carefully fill in almost all the fields, including the name of the event, round, time control, date, and full opponent’s name. While doing that, I would breathe slowly and think “Time to get ready to play!” and start to lose track of the outside world and focus on the job at hand. If it takes about two minutes to do all that, no problem.
“Almost all the fields”? The one field I would probably omit is the opponent’s rating (Tip #71)! You probably would play better and make better decisions about playing for wins or draws if you did not take your opponent’s rating into account. Sometimes it is difficult not to know the opponent’s rating, but if you can wait until after the game, that’s usually helpful.
Tip 89
Chess ruts can often be cured by ‘filling in gaps’, a new mental approach, finding and fixing misconceptions, reworking your thought process, taking a break, or sometimes thinking ‘outside the box’.
There are two important issues within this tip:
• Ruts are different than their cousin, slumps. A slump is where you are not performing as well as normal and your short-term results have been poorer than expected. A rut is when you are stuck at a level below where you eventually hope/expect to be, and you do not know how to improve.
• Chess is not like math or other endeavours that are formally taught in a rigorous and logically building manner. Most improving chess players learn in a much more hodgepodge manner, often following well-intentioned but less helpful advice and/or absorbing material that is either too advanced for what is optimally needed or inappropriate in some manner.
When complex material is learned in a non-optimum (to say the least) way, what results is a player who often improves to a point where there are many ‘holes’ in their chess education; material they should have learned better earlier in their study, but now is either overlooked or discarded as ‘too basic’. In math terms, it might be like someone who understands how to do “2 x 2 + 7 = 11”, but can’t count past 30 and has to guess when someone asks what ‘1,000’ means.
Having taught over 1,000 students, I consistently run into this issue. Not only do students have a variety of ‘missing’ capabilities and knowledge to advance, but they are reading chess books of all different levels because they just don’t know better. A ‘school’ analogy would be that they are in third grade, but they are reading books meant for second grade, fifth grade, freshman college, and grad school!
I once saw a local young player, about 9, not one of the top 9-year-olds in the US, carrying around a copy of
My 60 Memorable Games
(!) by Evans and Fischer. This is a wonderful book, but it is hardly an appropriate game book for improving youngsters. I felt very sorry for this young boy, but it was not my job to seek out his coach and ask why his student had such inappropriate material.
This type of ‘hodge-podge’ chess learning is, unfortunately, more the rule than the exception. One of the results of studying the wrong material is that it leads to the type of gaps in abilities and knowledge that lead to ruts.
Got to any chess forum and you will see all kinds of advice on which openings to play or which advanced books are the best. But then watch amateurs play and you see the same mistakes repeatedly that cost games, such as:
• They make moves without checking to see if the moves are safe, then are surprised when the opponent makes a check, capture, or threat they can’t meet.
• They play too many fast/intermediate time control games and wonder why they never learn how to visualize well, or think carefully and critically.
• They play too fast or too slow and wonder why their results are so consistently poor.
• They make well-known inaccuracies early in the opening because they never properly reference all that opening knowledge they purchased.
• They miss basic tactics that cost them games against higher-rated players because repetitious study of basic tactics is ‘too easy’ for them.
• They never play over many (many!) games from instructive anthologies like my
The World’s Most Instructive Amateur Game Book
or McDonald’s
Chess: The Art of Logical Thinking
. Remember, I read about 2,000 games the first three years I played seriously.
• They never learn a good thought process or evaluation because those important skills are not widely taught.
• They do not activate
all
their pieces in the opening quickly, safely, and efficiently when they are out of book. They have a ‘better idea’.
When the fundamentals are not drilled in properly, it eventually leads to mysterious ‘ruts’ when doing more material appropriate to their level doesn’t seem to get the proper results. For example, if one cannot recognize (not just solve!) most of, if not almost all, the common basic tactics that frequently occur both quickly and accurately, then one will get diminishing returns from exclusively studying intermediate tactics. IM Mark Dvoretsky, one of the most legendary instructors, estimated that there were about 2,000 of these basic tactical patterns that frequently occur.
Getting mid-level players who are in a rut to go back and study what is to them ‘more basic’ material is difficult. Psychologically, they not only feel this is a step back, they also feel that the material is a waste of time because they ‘know’ most of it already or they can ‘solve’ things easily.
However, try the following experiment. Take a ‘stuck’ mid-level player, let us say around 1500 FIDE/USCF, and watch him play a bunch of quick games against someone around 1800-1900. Then categorize why they lost each game. What you will find is not that they made subtle positional mistakes and got outplayed (that does happen occasionally); more likely they overlooked simple safety issues, basic piece activation, made infamous opening inaccuracies, and/or played too fast or too slow. They need to build up their infrastructure!
So far, we have addressed ‘filling in the gaps;. but let’s consider other ways of breaking out of a rut:
• Finding and fixing misconceptions – sometimes ‘subtracting a negative’ is as powerful or more as ‘adding a positive’. I notice in my new students that many have long-standing misconceptions on a variety of issues, such as adding knowledge instead of increasing skills, overvaluing how ‘bad’ weak pawns are in many positions, the average values of the pieces, definitions of critical items like backward pawns or the bishop-pair, or dismissing entire openings just because they are not currently popular with grandmasters. Correcting a misconception can help bootstrap improvement.
• Re-working your thought process – players are never ‘taught’ a thought process; they develop it on their own. But this often leads to not only a poor process, but an ingrained one that may be inefficient, slow, fast, or otherwise deficient. Listening to (or reading how) strong players think or taking lessons from a coach who will dissect and improve your process can go a long way to getting one out of a rut.
• Taking a break – sometimes players try too hard and burn out. In doing so, they make it difficult to achieve the very thing they are trying to do. Occasionally I hear someone tell me they took a break to regain their joy in playing or studying, to assimilate many of the things they had been trying to learn, or just to let their brain ‘reset’ and get a rest. This doesn’t always work, but it should not be overlooked as a possibility.
• Thinking outside the box – sometimes a new paradigm, like the notes above about improving skills instead of adding knowledge, or subtracting some negatives instead of just adding positives, can be just what the chess doctor ordered. Taking a step back and looking at the big picture can be helpful. A new coach can sometimes provide that, but it could just be asking the currently coach to try a different approach, if he/she is open to that possibility.
One final bit of extra good news – many of the same suggestions which can get you out of a rut can also help cure a slump!
Tip 90
Retreating or moving a piece back to its original square is not a sign of weakness.
I have been quoted by another author for my saying “That move is a retreat in direction only!”, meaning that sometimes moves that move pieces backward can be strong attacking moves as well.
I have noticed that weaker players will often not retreat a piece, nor move it back to its original square, no matter how much better it is to do so. When I ask them why they did not, they answer is usually “because that’s where I came from.” This illogic often is applied to retreating a bishop along the same path it came from. For example, if a beginner plays an early Bf1-c4 and that bishop gets attacked, they will almost always move Bc4-b3 even if Bc4-e2 or Bc4-f1 is clearly superior. They just feel that Bc4-b3 ‘makes progress’ along the new diagonal, whereas retreating on the a6-f1 diagonal is either cowardly or makes no progress.
But good players do not think that way; they don’t care what any earlier position looked like. They just want to find the best move, and the history of the position is rarely much of a factor. As an amusing example, consider the Ulvestad Line in the Two Knights Defense
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5 5.exd5 b5!?
.
White to play after 5...b5!?
I went to the Lichess databases, of which there are two: the master database and the ‘everyone’ database. In the master database the strong retreat 6.Bf1 was played in 80% of the games, with White winning more than he/she lost. However, in the ‘everyone’ database, the most popular move played over 56% of the opportunities was 6.Bxb5?, which lost most of the games. The correct 6.Bf1 was only played in a little over 15% of the games. Therefore, the ‘retreat’ 6.Bf1 was played 80% by strong players, but only about 15% by everyone!
Consider too Duda-Caruana, Bucharest 2023:
White to play after 17...
N
d5
From my experience, many amateurs would think “My rook is attacked, but retreating it to e2 is more active than putting it back on e1, where it came from; also, it might allow me to double rooks or play Qe1 and get a battery on the e-file.” They would thus play the inferior 18.Re2.
But the full retreat 18.Re1 is much better – it does not block the queen on the d1-h5 diagonal and it avoids further attack with moves like ...Nd5-f4.
Bottom line: if you want to find the best moves, hand-waving ideas like ‘I just came from there’ or ‘I don’t want to go backwards’ are usually not the best ways to determine a move. Forget what happened earlier or where the pieces started; look at all the reasonable candidate moves with fresh eyes and no prior prejudice.
Chapter Four
Tactics/Safety
This chapter provides tips that address what I consider the most important ‘on-the-board’ issues – determining if candidate moves (including, of course, the one you play) are safe, and whether opponent’s moves are safe. Of course, tactical tips include those addressing win of material and checkmate – how to study/recognize/analyze the patterns, and also some general tips on attacking.
Tip 91
*Top-10 Tip*
The purpose of doing basic tactics is not to just to win material/mate, but also to reject candidates which lose material/allow mate. Moreover, a principal goal of studying basic tactics is to
recognize
common tactical patterns, not just be able to solve them.
Playing safe moves requires the ability to recognize and analyze dangerous moves that the opponent can do in reply, and to make sure all of the opponent’s dangerous moves can be safely met next turn. The foundation for the ability to play safe moves is the study and recognition of basic safety patterns. Many new students think that repetitious study of basic problems is not helpful because they can solve them so easily. But the goal should be quick and accurate recognition, not just solving. Take the analogy of learning 6x7. You can add six 7s by going 7+7 =14 + 7 =21 +7 =28 +7 =35 + 7 =42. You can probably do that fairly quickly with a good deal of accuracy. But you can’t compete with someone who recognizes 6x7 is 42 instantly.
Moreover, if you are playing a competent opponent, your opportunities to win material will be limited, but if careless you could
lose
material on almost every move after the first few. Therefore, a majority of your use of basic tactics is to recognize/analyze when your
own
moves are not safe!
Let’s take a simple example. In the following game my student was Black and he had already misplayed the opening a little when he had to answer White’s
4.cxd5
:
Black to play
After 4...Qxd5, 5.Nc3 gives White a big advantage, but Black has nothing better.
However, my student quickly played
4...Nb4??
. When I asked him after the game why he played that move, he not unexpectedly replied that he was only thinking of the threat of 5...Nc2+.
But 4...Nb4?? is a combination of Hope Chess (not analyzing your opponent’s possible checks, captures, or threats in reply to your move to see if you can safely meet them), hand-waving (moving on principle or idea, and not based on analysis), and a silly threat (Tip #97). Of course, White can safely meet the threat with 5.Na3?, but he correctly played his only check
5.Qa4+
, won the knight and the game. The pattern of 5.Qa4+ double-attacking the knight and the king is common and basic.
I am not going to claim that knowing basic tactic patterns better would have prevented Black from playing Hope Chess and losing the knight, but it would have given him a better chance. You can’t just rely on your tactical vision to determine if a move is safe; you have to analyze your opponent’s possible replies of dangerous forcing moves as well. Knowing more tactical patterns is an aid to your analysis to determine whether your move is safe, not the sole determinator.
The following well-known position occurs in the Alapin Sicilian after
1.e4 c5 2.c3 d5 3.exd5 Qxd5 4.d4 cxd4 5.cxd4 Nc6 6.Nf3 Bg4 7.Be2
. If Black is not an experienced player, he might notice that the d-pawn has two guards and two attackers, but one of the attackers, the knight on f3, is ‘removable’ so a removal of the guard tactic starting with 7...Bxf3 is worth investigating.
Black to play after 7.
B
e2
If Black now makes a quiescence error, he could conclude he would win a pawn after
7...Bxf3? 8.Bxf3 Qxd4??
. But if so, White’s only check,
9.Bxc6+
,
would win the queen with a much more powerful removal of the guard after
9...bxc6 10.Qxd4.
When my son Delen was a beginning player, he fell for this tactic – twice! He did not calculate it correctly the first time, and he also did not remember it the second.
Strong players would not make this mistake not because they don’t usually make easy quiescence errors – they don’t – but because this is a well-known tactic and they would just recognize the position and know about the trap. If you are not a strong player, it is much easier to misplay this position if you need to figure it out than it would be if you just recognize the pattern. This is the kind of benefit you get when you study basic tactics repetitiously.
Which type of tactics are the best to study? The kind that occur frequently in games, and ones that win some material – a pawn, the exchange, a piece, a rook. That is why I recommend books such as Giannatos’s
Everyone’s First Chess Workbook
or Bain’s
Chess Tactics for Students
for repetitious study.
Interestingly, at the other end of the difficulty spectrum of tactical puzzles are endgame studies and composed mating problems, such as clever mate in two positions. In the Introduction to
Tactical Training in the Endgame
, author IM Lakdawala strongly recommends that intermediate players, even as low as 1200 FIDE, can greatly benefit from the imagination generated by even attempting to solve these difficult problems. He suggests these players incorporate these puzzles as part of their study plan.
In summary, I suggest that repetitious study of basic tactics, such as those in Giannatos and Bain, should be part of everyone’s study program until they are at least rated about 1900 FIDE. That does not mean players under 1900 can’t study more advanced tactics or other types of puzzles – as they get stronger, they should augment their basic tactics study with puzzles of a variety of types and levels, like the composed ones Lakdawala recommends or just intermediate tactics in a set like Coakley’s excellent
Winning Chess Exercises for Kids
– but it does mean that even when some puzzle sets seem ‘too easy’ those easy puzzles can still provide a big benefit.
Tip 92
Tactics and safety dominate positional and strategic aspects.
Another way of saying this is strategy is the tiebreak of equally safe moves. Of course, you can purposely play an unsafe move – we call these sacrifices! But sacrifices are more the exception than the rule. While positional and strategic aspects may often point toward certain candidate moves, if those candidates are not safe, they usually (but not always!) must be discarded, no matter their benefit.
I once had a student who was Black in a position that was roughly comparable to:
Black to play
When we got to this point while reviewing the game, I said: “OK, you are ahead a piece and should have an easy win. But your king is a little unsafe in the middle of the board so you should try to castle queenside. However, if you play a move like 1...Qe7? immediately, then White has 2.Qb5+ picking up the bishop,
so I would first play a move like 1...Bb6 and then move the queen and castle and you should win easily.”
My student replied: “Dan, I went through the entire same logic that you did, but I skipped the step where you checked to see if the queen move was safe so, for the same reason, I played 1...Qe7?? and after 2.Qb5+ I lost my bishop and ended up losing the game!”
Strategically it was clear what Black should do, but he had to first ensure his intended move was safe. He skipped the most important step of the process!
Tip 93
The forcing moves are checks, captures, and threats. So almost all tactics (except possibly zugzwang) involve checks, captures, and/or threats.
I have used the phrase ‘checks, captures, and threats’ (CCT) for so long and so repeatedly that it may only be second to ‘Hope Chess’ among chess ideas I have named that have caught on with the general public. CCT may have existed before I started using it, but I do not remember getting it from another source.
Amusingly, I used CCT so much in the lectures at our chess club that one of our members went to Café Press and designed hats with ‘checks, captures, and threats’ on it! Of course, if you wear the hat, it may help your opponent more than it helps you!
The functional use of CCT is very clear: either side cannot initiate a tactic unless the move is one of those three types. One problem I have found over my years of teaching this is that everyone knows what a check or capture is, but they can only vaguely describe a threat, so here goes:
Threat: A move which can win material, checkmate, or do something positive
next move
if the opponent does not stop it. Attacks on under-defended pieces are examples of a threat.
Note that a check or capture can also be a threat. Let’s return (from Tip #44) to the following ‘White to Play and Win’ position from Bain’s
Chess Tactics for Students
. The winning move was a capture, but can you find all the white moves that are
not
checks or captures, but can be categorized as threats?
Find all the White moves that are threats
The key to getting this correct is to understand that just as not all checks and captures are good moves, not all threats are good moves either. Here are all the threats:
• 1.Bb4 – this makes the strong threats of both 2.Rxe7 and 2.Bxe7+. Is it a good move? Of course not, since Black can counter the threat with 1...Bxb4.
• 1.Ba6 – this unsafe move has the clear threat of 2.Bxb7 winning a pawn.
• 1.Bc6 – also threatens 2.Bxb7.
• 1.Ba5 threatens the ‘overworked piece’ tactic 2.Bxc7+, winning a pawn.
• 1.Be5 also threatens 2.Bxc7+, winning a pawn.
Other moves that are not checks or captures are not immediate threats to do something positive
next move
. For example, 1.a5 is not a threat, but it does threaten to make the threat 2.a6 on the next move.
Similarly, 1.g4 doesn’t threaten anything; if Black does nothing, he’s safe, but next move it would allow White to make the Attack with something Worth Less (‘AWL’; see the next Tip, #94) threat of 2.g5, so it ‘threatens to threaten’. Can these long-term (‘threaten to threaten’ or even ‘threaten to threaten to threaten’ in three moves) ‘threats’ be strong moves which require the opponent to take notice or even take preventative action?
Of course, but we have to draw the definition line somewhere reasonable or else moves like the first move of the game already become threats as after 1.e4 we would could say White is ‘threatening’ 1...-- 2.Qf3 and 2...-- 3.Bc4 and 3...-- 4.Qxf7#!
The exceptions to the CCT moves initiating most tactics would primarily be endgame moves that either create immediate zugzwang opportunities or long-term promotion threats. When someone plays a strong tactical move that ‘threatens to threaten’, but does not immediately perform a CCT, we usually call that a ‘quiet move’. Quiet moves are more difficult to find for the very reason they are not the ‘loud’ CCTs and don’t catch our eye as easily, and are often award an ‘!’ by the annotator.
Tip 94
AWL (Attacking With a Lesser valued piece) is an important chess concept, and often a constructive threat.
There are often many ways to deal with a threatened piece: move it, guard it, block the attack, capture the attacking piece, counterattack. But when the threat is an Attack with Something Worth Less (AWL), concepts like ‘guarding it’ are removed or at least strongly diminished, making the AWL threat ‘more forcing’.
When AWL is used in the opening to develop a piece plus the piece being attacked cannot go to a clearly better square, this is the well-known concept of ‘winning a tempo’.
For example, after
1.e4 d5 2.exd5 Qxd5
we consider the AWL
3.Nc3
to be winning a tempo because the knight is developed from b1 to the good square c3, while the black queen on d5 has to move to another reasonable square (usually a5, d6, or maybe d8). To contrast, let’s say Black plays the inferior move
3...Qc5?
.
White to play after 3...
Q
c5?
Now 4.Na4? is clearly another AWL, but it’s
not
winning a tempo! In fact, we could consider 4.Na4 to be
losing
a tempo since the knight will be going to an inferior square while the black queen will be going to an acceptable square, say 4...Qa5.
But White did have a different AWL that
would
win a tempo. Do you see it? Of course, it is
4.d4
, which is a good developing move, and now the black queen will have to move again, and White is gaining more time.
To further illustrate this point, let’s consider two similar-looking move sequences: 1.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.Qxd4 and 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4 Nxd4 5.Qxd4.
The first line is the rare Center Game. Why is it rare for White to play this?
Black to play after 3.
Q
xd4
Answer: White does not wish to expose his queen to the AWL 3...Nc6.
But if so, why is the second sequence 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4 Nxd4 5.Qxd4 also rare, but in this case avoided by Black? Because 4...Nxd4(?) 5.Qxd4 also attracts the queen to the center, but now there is no good AWL to win a tempo:
Black to play after 5.
Q
xd4
The missing knights make all the difference. In the previous diagram Black has 3...Nc6, but in the current diagram the only AWL to attack the queen is 5...c5, a move I see beginners make sometimes, but it doesn’t ‘win a tempo’ because moving the pawn to c5 is not only not a developing move, it actually has some negative consequences as it both blocks Black’s dark-squared bishop, makes the d-pawn somewhat backward, and weakens the squares d5 and d6.
Therefore, in the previous diagram where White played 1.e4 e5 2.d4 exd4 3.Qxd4 Nc6 Black is doing well, whereas in the last diagram after 4...Nxd4(?) 5.Qxd4 White’s queen is well-placed in the center (not developing it ‘too soon’!), and thus it is White that is doing better than normal.
Because AWL moves are more forcing than most other types of threats, it makes sense to prioritize them when looking for dangerous moves (e.g. checks, captures, and threats of consequence) for both attacking ideas on offense and safety issues, primarily when determining if your own moves are safe...
Tip 95
When looking for forcing moves (checks, captures, and threats) to either initiate tactics or keep the initiative, consider AWL moves to not only displace pieces, but as a key concept in trapping pieces.
Since checks, captures, and threats are the most forcing candidate moves and AWL is almost always a threat, AWLs are often strong candidate moves. If the tempo spent making the AWL (or any threat) is at least as worthwhile as the opponent’s use of tempo to meet the threat, then the threat is viable, but not always best.
To illustrate, let’s compare the early e4-e5 move to attack a knight in the Alekhine’s Defense (
1.e4 Nf6 2.e5
)
with the trap in the Vienna Game (
1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.f4 exf4? 4.e5
). In Alekhine’s Defense...
Black to play after the AWL 2.e5
...Black’s knight is not forced to retreat, but can move to the central square, 2...Nd5. Note the tempo Black spends moving the knight twice is nullified by the tempo White spent moving the e-pawn twice, so neither side is gaining in development. But both 2.e5 and 2...Nd5 have pros and cons. For White he gains a little space and the black knight goes to another square (d5) where it can be hit with a further AWL (c2-c4). From Black’s point of view, the knight is perfectly safe and the advanced white e-pawn can be used as a target after a further ...d7-d6 break move by Black.
While Alekhine’s Defense is the not the first choice of most elite grandmasters, it has a respectable enough reputation that Fischer chose to use it in the 13th game of his famous 1972 world championship match versus Spassky.
On the other hand, let’s look at a similar AWL in the Vienna after
1.e4 e5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.f4 exf4?
.
This is a common mistake at the amateur level. If you are supposed to capture in the King’s Gambit after f2-f4, why not here? Instead, 3...d5 is correct. White can now AWL with
4.e5
:
Black to play after the AWL 4.e5
There is one major difference between this position and the one previously in Alekhine’s Defense: the presence of the knight at c3 makes the centralization of the black knight with 4...Nd5 or 4...Ne4 unsafe, so the only safe knight move is 4...Ng8. In practice, amateur players who have fallen for this trap often temporize by first desperately pinning the knight with
4...Qe7(?)
, which only makes things worse if White counters with
5.Qe2
. Then the retreat
5...Ng8
is forced anyway, when White can get a big center with
6.d4
. Best play after that could be
6...Qh4+ 7.Kd1!
when Black is already in big trouble as moves like the AWL Ng1-f3 and a later Bc1xf4 are on the horizon; Black has extreme difficulty both making the queen safe and completing his development.
Compare this to White’s sixth move
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Bc5 4.c3 d6? 5.d4 Bb6 6.d5?
.
Black to play after 6.d5?
This AWL (attractive to beginners who want to ‘hit the knight and gain space’) not only doesn’t win a tempo – d4-d5 is hardly a developing move – but the space gain is also illusory; instead, White is just blocking his nice bishop on c4, removing the queen’s pressure on the d-file, and taking the pressure off the e5-square. Therefore, while 6.d5 is a candidate move and it forces the knight to move off a fairly good square, the net result is not that good for White and moves like 6.d5 should be considered carefully before playing.
Tip 96
The first important thing you need to know about a move is ‘Is it safe?’
This seems like such an obvious, simple suggestion/tip, but as a long-time instructor, I have found that most lower-rated players are quite eager to find out when their opponent’s moves are not safe, but not nearly so keen on checking on their own moves before they make them. There are three main reasons for this:
• 99% of the puzzles in tactics books or on tactics servers present issues from the ‘offensive’ view: “White to play and win”, “White to play and mate”, “White to play and mate in n”, but not so much “White to play and make sure Black can’t win”. I did produce some of that rare material; I wrote an entire book called
Is Your Move Safe?
• Offense is both more fun and natural. When you start playing it is a lot more fun to see if you can win your opponent’s queen or sacrifice yours for a checkmate than it is to make sure your opponent cannot do it to you on his/her next move.
• Offense is initially easier. It takes one less ply to see what you can initiate this move than it requires to first assume your move then see what your opponent can do with his/hers.
You want to know both if your moves are safe and if your opponent’s moves are safe. This is so important that several other tips are involved, which we will reference. For example, when your opponent moves, the first two questions you want to ask yourself are ‘Is his/her move safe?’ and ‘What are
all
the important things that move does?’ (Tip #56).
As for your own candidate moves, one of the first questions you need to ask is, ‘Is it safe?’ waiting until later to check the safety of your move with a Sanity Check – or not at all – is both inefficient and potentially dangerous (Tip #68).
Many lower and especially intermediate players do a superficial check to see if their move is safe by simply using their tactical vision to see if there is any danger. Unfortunately, that is only helpful, not sufficient. Instead, you need to visualize if the candidate move is made, what dangerous checks, captures, and threats does the opponent have in reply, and can you safely meet them next move. If you don’t do this, I call that Hope Chess (Tip #65).
When your opponent has a clear threat, the number of safe moves may be limited. In that case, one of the first questions you should ask is ‘What are
all
my safe moves?’ If you don’t see all of them, how would you know which is the best? Try that in this position; after
1.f4
, White is clearly threatening 2.fxe5. How many safe moves does Black have? List them.
Black to play after 1.f4
There are
four
safe moves: 1...Qa1,
1...Qb2,
1...Qd4 and 1...Qc3 (you can’t play what you don’t see – Tip #50).
When I test students many miss 1...Qc3 for obvious reasons: it doesn’t
look
safe, but, of course, if 2.Rxc3 then 2...gxh6 leaves Black ahead a bishop. 1...Qc3 is one of those invisible moves, like sneaky pins.
But in the game Black, even though he was ahead a piece and should keep things simple (Tip #85), tried to be clever (Tip #61) and played a move he thought was safe with
1...Kf8??
. Do you see why this is a blunder?
White can play 2.Qh8+ Ke7 3.Qxe8+! Kxe8 4.fxe5, winning a rook! Instead, White hallucinated thinking he also had a clever move and played
2.Rxg7??
, but after
2...Qxg7
White woke up and resigned due to this Counting error (Tip #99).
Tip 97
Do not make ‘silly’ threats that are easily met, hoping the opponent will not meet them correctly.
I define a ‘silly’ threat as one which is (i.) easily met, and (ii.) the move that meets the threat helps the opponent more than the move which made the threat (or hurts the opponent less than making the threat hurts the threatener). For example,
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Bc5 4.0-0 Nf6 5.Ng5
...
Black to move after 5.
N
g5(?)
...is a silly threat to capture on f7 because the simple reply
5...0-0
helps Black while 5.Ng5
detracts from White’s position. Here is another example from a recent student game:
Black to play
Black played
1...Nc4
, threatening the queen. But this overworks his own queen, which must both guard the knight on c4 and the pawn on d6. White can move his queen to a more central square, but the best way to save his queen is by playing
2.Bxc4 Qxc4 3.Qxd6
and White wins a pawn.
In the first diagram in Tip #94 after 1.e4 d5 2.exd5 Qxd5 3.Nc3 Qc5? the move 4.Na4? was a silly threat since this threat is easily seen and met, plus the black queen gains more (or in this case loses less) from moving from c5 to another square than the knight does by going from c3 to a4.
For a threat not to be silly, the move that meets the threat cannot be more helpful than the move that made the threat. If we turn that around, we get a powerful principle (*Tip Alert!*):
For a threat to be strongly considered, the move that makes the threat must do as much, or preferably more, for the player making the threat than the (best) move meeting the threat does for the opponent
.
In other words, making the threat must help you (or hurt you less) than meeting it does for the opponent.
When I watch games of low-rated players, they often make silly threats. They do not ask themselves what opponent replies would meet the threat or how helpful those replies are for the opponent. In many cases they just hope the threat will not be met (which I do not call Hope Chess – see Tip #65) so they can gain some advantage, even if the threat can easily be met.
Why do low-rated players make silly threats? Because when they are beginners and play other beginners, their opponents often pay little (or no) attention to what they are doing, so many silly threats are completely overlooked and the ‘easily met’ threat is instead allowed to be executed. For example, a piece attacks a queen, and the opponent will not see it and allow the queen to be captured next move. Allowing these silly threats to ‘work’ forms a psychological reinforcement that doing them was constructive. The problem is that even intermediate players can identify and meet silly threats, so, at the next level, that same strategy of making silly threats not only does not work, it usually backfires.
Is it ever correct to make a threat that’s even remotely close to silly? Sure (*Tip Alert!*):
If you are losing
it is often correct to make moves
that
give the opponent a chance to go wrong
. In those situations, you have nothing to lose by making moves that, if met correctly, could deteriorate the situation even more, moves that may not be best, or even good but if met incorrectly, can let you back in the game or even win on the spot. But if you not losing – or worse, winning – then making silly threats can easily deteriorate your position if properly met.
Tip 98
The average piece values are not exactly 1-3-3-5-9.
Beginners are properly taught average piece values so they can judge which piece trades are advantageous, fair, or disadvantageous. The common set of beginner values taught is:
• Pawn = 1.
• Knight and Bishop = 3.
• Rook = 5.
• Queen = 9.
I call these integer values the ‘Reinfeld’ values after prolific 20th century author Fred Reinfeld, a strong US Master who wrote many basic books aimed at the general public. My first chess book was written by Reinfeld.
At a fairly young age, I deduced the Reinfeld values could not be the exact correct averages (not that I knew better ones then...). Why? Because they are all integers, and the chances that the average value of each piece could so neatly fit into an integer multiple of a pawn’s value was too much of a coincidence. It would be like saying that everyone in your family is exactly 5, 6, or 7 feet tall and no one could be in-between, let’s say, 5’ 9½”.
For most positions and possible trades, the Reinfeld values are adequate, especially for beginners. But some students take these numbers as some sort of gospel, and resist when I try to explain that the actual averages are better approximated with some fractions.
When I ask lower-rated players why I knew the Reinfeld numbers could not be very accurate, they often mis-guess by saying that it is because a piece’s value depends on the position. While that is true, it doesn’t affect why the ‘average’ piece values can’t be too accurate if always represented by integers.
The fact that piece values vary with position helps underlie why we have terms like ‘good bishop’ and ‘bad bishop’ because the former is worth more than the latter in their respective positions.
However, the average values (over all positions) do not change; they simply get measured more accurately as we develop superior tools to measure them. In 1999 GM Larry Kaufman published an award-winning study ‘The Evaluation of Material Imbalances’, where he evaluated about 300,000 games by computer to estimate average piece value. Since then, GM Kaufman has updated his results in works like
The Kaufman Repertoire in Black and White.
GM Soltis has also written about average piece value schemes in the first chapter of his book
Rethinking the Chess Pieces.
As a rough summary of Kaufman’s results, here are some values:
• Pawn = 1.
• Knight and Bishop = 3.5 pawns.
• Rook = 5.25 pawns.
• Queen = 10 pawns.
• King is worth about 4.25 pawns fighting value.
• Having ‘the bishop-pair’ (one side has both bishops and the other side does not), is worth a bonus of about 0.5 pawns.
Notice I use pawns as the unit of measurement, not the popular ‘points’. Since under all ‘point’ systems 1 pawn = 1 point, it makes sense to me (and others) to use the tangible part of that, the pawn, as a basis, without introducing another intangible factor like points. Sure, a pawn can often be worth somewhat more or less than its average of one pawn, but in my opinion that’s not enough reason to introduce the abstract points as the base measure.
The piece values are used to determine the relative material balance on any board position, plus they are the basis for determining if one side or the other is losing (or winning) material on any sequence of forcing moves (Tip #49).
A very specific example of where Reinfeld values can be misleading will be discussed in Tip #123: Except in some deep endgame positions, two minor pieces are almost always worth more than a rook and a pawn.
Tip 99
When people see my tactic name ‘Counting’, many erroneously assume it is simply knowing Reinfeld average piece values (1-3-3-5-9). Instead, it is the potentially complex issue of deciding whether capturing sequences (on any squares) win and/or lose material.
Counting potential trades on one square is common and usually not very difficult, although weak players occasional ‘miscount’ and end up losing material when they think they should end up equal or ahead. But the more difficult ‘Counting tactics’ usually involve captures on multiple squares, such as when both sides have desperado pieces. Let’s consider a couple of example Counting positions, the first one being the less difficult:
Black to play
Black is in check, so he either must move the king or take the knight. If he moves the king, then 2.Qxf4 and the best Black can do is take the knight on the second move to get even, so it makes sense to probably take the knight first. If the ‘obvious’ 1...gxf5 then 2.Qxf4 and White remains up a pawn.
But the right move is the pseudo-sacrifice
1...Qxf5
when Black wins a piece; if
2.gxf5 Bxd2
or if the white queen moves, then Black saves his queen too.
In the next position, is 1.Nxd5 safe?
White to play
If you just count the number of attackers and defenders on d5, that won’t be sufficient because those captures are not independent of the safety of other squares. Moreover, just counting the number of attackers and defenders doesn’t work when the capturing pieces have different values. For example, it is less helpful for White to have his queen on d3 capturing first before the d1-rook.
More complications occur when Black at some point inserts the zwischenzug ...Nc6xe5, capturing a piece and attacking the queen and potentially overworking the c1-rook. Sometimes it seems only an engine can figure all the permutations. In this case
1.Nxd5?
is not safe, e.g.
1...Nxd5 2.Bxd5 Nxe5 3.Bxe5 Rxc1 4.Rxc1 Qxd5
wins a piece or 2.Nxc6 bxc6 guards d5 adequately and Black remains a piece ahead.
Just like other tactics, such as pins and double attacks, Counting is a concept which is not a tactic when there is no win of material. However, especially in games of lower-rated players, there are often Counting sequences that do win (or lose) material and these thus become tactics. Considering these circumstances, Counting is a fairly common tactic, but one that had never been given a name until I addressed it in a
Chess Café
column and wrote about it in my book
Back to Basics: Tactics
. I would like to thank GM John Nunn for ‘blessing’ me to use that name; I had contacted Dr. Nunn when I first decided to write about and name Counting and he said “it was as good a name as any.”
Tip 100
Use the Seeds of Tactical Destruction to determine whether it is worthwhile to analyze possible tactical sequences.
Long before Emmanuel Neiman wrote his book
Tune Your Chess Tactics Antenna
, I had been writing about the ‘weakened’ aspects of a position that would cause the opponent to think there might be a tactic. In my writings and my book
Back to Basics: Tactics
I called these the ‘Seeds of Tactical Destruction’, but Neiman chose to call them ‘signals’. Same exact thing.
While time will tell if either name catches on with the general chess public, the concept is powerful and important:
you cannot have a tactic unless something is wrong with your opponent’s position
. Just to make things more interesting, while it is difficult if not impossible to have a tactic without a Seed, it is very possible that the opponent has one or more Seeds, but there is no tactic!
As a very simple example, it is possible to have a very weak back-rank, but if the opponent has no major pieces (queen or rooks), a back-rank mate is not possible!
In his writings, GM Dr. Nunn has said that the number one Seed is loose (unguarded and vulnerable) pieces, so Nunn’s Dictum is:
Loose Pieces Drop Off
(LPDO).
A great example of LPDO at the highest level is the infamous game Christiansen-Karpov, Wijk aan Zee 1993:
Black to move
Black already has one hanging (loose) piece on h5, but he created another with
11...Bd6??
. Christiansen figured out the geometry – and probably could not believe his eyes or his luck – ‘retreated’ with
12.Qd1
(Tip #90), and Karpov had to resign.
The following is a common tactic allowed by lower-rated players, who create a discernible ‘Seed’:
Black to play after 1.
N
d5
Black feels the pressure of the pin and wants to alleviate it, so he ‘puts the question’ to the bishop with
1...h6?
What is the Seed of Tactical Destruction? It is the overworked (some call it overburdened) bishop on g7 who is trying to guard both f6 and h6. Therefore, it makes sense for White to see if he can capture either f6 or h6 in some sequence and end up ahead.
Clearly 2.Bxh6? Bxh6 doesn’t work because the queen is still guarding the knight on f6. Similarly 2.Bxf6 Bxf6 doesn’t work because it’s the white bishop on g5 that was attacking the pawn on h6. So the correct sequence is
2.Nxf6+
. Now the queen cannot recapture, so Black is forced to play
2...Bxf6
, removing the guard on h6, and then
3.Bxh6
wins a pawn. I see similar ‘overworked’ patterns all the time in amateur games – sometimes the white player sees he can win the pawn and sometimes when he doesn’t it becomes a double blunder (Black could lose a pawn, but White doesn’t see it).
What are other Seeds besides loose and overworked pieces? Pieces geometrically lined up for pins, skewers, discovered attacks, and/or double attacks/threats; weak back rank; pieces that have low mobility and might be trapped; an exposed king; letting an opponent’s pawn have promotion possibilities; etc.
Tip 101
A piece that is only guarded as many times as it is attacked (‘barely adequately defended’ or ‘inadequately defended/guarded’) can often be subject to tactics much like those that can be applied to an undefended piece.
Another way of saying this is that any piece attacked as many times as guarded, even if those numbers are both zero (not attacked nor defended), can easily fall victim to a double attack or other tactics. Let’s show two examples:
Black to play and win a piece
I have given this puzzle to many students and they see the bishop is attacked once and guarded once so many say the answer is 1...Qa5+(?), which could win the piece if White mundanely answers something like 2.c3? Nxg5. However, White has a defensive tactic that would minimize the damage. Can you find it?
The reason 1...Qa5+(?) is not correct is that White can use the tactic ‘attraction’ to play 2.b4!. Then obviously 2...Nxg5?? fails to 3.bxa5, but if the queen moves along the fifth rank, White will simply save the bishop. And after 2...Qxb4+ 3.Nbd2 White is only losing a pawn, since the black queen has been attracted to the fourth rank.
So correct is first to play
1...Nxg5 2.Nxg5
. Then instead of the piece on g5 being defended once and attacked once, it is attacked and defended zero times, but is subject to a double-attack with
2...Qa5+
, picking up the piece.
A tactic akin to this occurs in many queen’s pawn games when Black tries to get rid of his ‘bad’ light-squared bishop by pinning its counterpart before Black has castled, e.g.
1.d4 d5 2.Bf4 Nf6 3.Nf3 e6 4.e3 c5 5.c3 b6 6.Bd3 Be7 7.0-0 Ba6??
.
White to play after 7...
B
a6??
In this second example, we again see a barely adequately guarded piece, this time the bishop on a6 (attacked once, defended once) subject to danger. And once again the immediate check 8.Qa4+? is not the solution because Black has 8...Qd7 (8...b5 saves the piece, but drops a pawn), and White is not winning anything. If these examples teach us anything, it is that when the position is critical, we always must be careful! Therefore, the correct sequence is
8.Bxa6 Nxa6
and only now
9.Qa4+
, picking up the knight.
If Black wanted to trade off his ‘bad’ bishop, he should have played 7...0-0 first and if White continued mundanely with 8.Nbd2, then 8...Ba6 would be fine.
It was the famous (and eccentric) GM Aron Nimzowitsch, who suggested the concept of ‘overprotection’, where an attacked piece is protected more than it is attacked. One of the main ideas of overprotection is that it frees up all the defending pieces as any single one of them may not be necessary for the safety of the attacked but over-defended piece. However, a second benefit of overprotection is that it removes the possibility of the kind of tactics in our examples when a piece is only guarded as many times as it is attacked.
Tip 102
Studying ‘Removal of the Guard’ tactics generates exceptional returns on your time.
Having reviewed tens of thousands of students’ games, what I have noticed over the years is that the basic tactic most likely to be missed
(both on offense and defense)
is removal of the guard, with its sub-categories, deflection and overworked piece. Some call this motif ‘removing the defender’.
Why is studying this tactic so effective? I believe the reason that removal of the guard is a most commonly-missed tactical idea is because the concept is perhaps one step more abstract than the more mundane motifs, such as double attacks, discovered attacks, pins, etc. In other words, even though it is extremely common, it does not generate the kind of ‘Seeds of Tactical Destruction’ (Tip #100) alarm in lower-rated players’ tactical vision that causes them to spot this motif quite as easily.
When a student misses an easy tactic (either on offense or defense), I always try to get them to identify the name of the missed tactic, to not only generate awareness, but also help them identify areas of study. Removal of the guard came up quite often, and I made note of this.
About 20 years ago, armed with this information, I wrote a Novice Nook column for
Chess Café
called ‘The Underrated Removal of the Guard’, which also noted how often this tactic is missed and therefore the potential benefit from emphasizing it in study. About 4-6 months after I wrote the column, I received an email, which I will paraphrase:
“Hi Dan! You don’t know me, but I am an avid reader of your Novice Nook column and, when I read ‘The Underrated Removal of the Guard’ I realized it applied to me. So, I decided to stop playing in events for a couple of months and I got every book I could find that had a chapter on Removal of the Guard and I searched the web for Removal of the Guard problems. That is pretty much all the chess I did for 2 months. Then I went back to playing in tournaments and in my first few tournaments
my rating rose from 1500 to 1700!
I just wanted to let you know how much you had helped me.”
Besides being grateful for receiving such an email, my first reaction was ‘Should I believe him, sight and evidence unseen?’ If he had said his rating had risen from 700 to 900, then any serious chess study might have done that, so studying removal of the guard would not have done anything special. If he had said his rating had risen from 2100 to 2300, that would not have been possible if, for no other reason, 2100s are already sufficiently good at Removal of the Guard.
Finally, if he had written that he had studied the much rarer tactic ‘interference’, I could not see him going from 1500 to 1700 because that motif just doesn’t occur frequently enough to make that kind of difference. So, the bottom line was yes, going from 1500 to 1700 by mastering a common but often missed tactic was believable.
Here’s a typical removal of the guard problem from my book
Back to Basics: Tactics
.
Black to play and win
This is a typical pattern. White is threatening 2.Qxh7+, but Black can go on the offensive with
1...Qe1+ 2.Qf1 Bh2+
(removing the king’s guard of the queen)
3.Kxh2 Qxf1
. This is a deflection type, since the bishop check deflects the white king from his duty to guard the queen. Various removal of the guard patterns occur frequently in lower-rated players’ games, so not only does studying them give you some offensive chances, they also decrease the likelihood you will fall victim to one – assuming you are not playing Hope Chess.
Tip 103
A king is only as safe as the opponent’s ability to attack it.
A common misconception is that a king’s safety mainly depends upon the structural soundness of the pawns that protect it. While this factor is often an important one in determining king safety, it can also be meaningless in many situations.
The only thing that really makes a king unsafe is the opponent’s ability to attack it, assuming correct defense
.
Sometimes the safety issue may only be short term, or sometimes it is long term, but, in any case, it depends on several factors that affects the opponent’s ability to attack the king, such as, yes, the pawn structure, but also the relative power of the respective armies around the king, whether enough attacking force remains on the board, and specific ‘focal points’ (squares that the attacker can concentrate upon), which might be overwhelmed and vulnerable to attacking forces.
I like to use the following two ‘ad absurdum’ positions to illustrate this point. In each position it is Black to play and the question is: ‘Which king is safer?’
Black to play (Diagram 1)
The second position the same as the first except I switched the black pieces on g8 and h8:
Black to play (Diagram 2)
In both positions, Black has a pristine pawn cover around his king while White’s king is exposed in the middle of the board surrounded by Black pawns. Material is roughly equal; Black has two rooks and eight pawns for White’s extra two queens. If we use only the ‘conventional wisdom’ about pawn cover as a primary determination of king safety, then it is clear that Black’s king should be much safer.
However in the first diagram, despite it being Black’s move, White has at most a mate in four no matter what Black does, e.g.
1...Kc8 2.Qxb7+! Kxb7 3.Qc6+ Kb8 4.Qaa6 e4 5.Qab7#
.
In the second diagram, with just the one reversal of pieces, the situation could not have changed more dramatically, as Black has
1...f5#
. The overall structure did not change, but the single dynamic change to Black’s ability to immediately attack the white king made a 180 degree difference,
As an aside, when I give Diagram 2 to lower-rated students, the overwhelming majority start (or worse, only see) the vastly inferior 1...f6+? when, after 2.Ke4, Black is winning, but there’s still much work to do. This example alone says quite a bit about why these players are lower rated: they do not start by asking ‘What are all the reasonable candidate moves?’ (in this case, there’s only two of the necessary checks to start the attack), fail to heed Purdy’s famous tip “Look wide before you look deep!”, and even fail the well-known “If you see a good move, don’t play it; look for a better one...”; I usually add to this: “...you are trying to play the best move you can in a reasonable amount of time.”
Tip 104
There is no such thing as a ‘capture with the lowest valued piece’ rule!
Example 1: The first examples of this tip may seem too easy, but they are presented to make a point, so stick with me and see what you might learn:
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 d6
. Which white piece should capture first on e5?
Which White piece should capture first on e5?
Of course, if White is to capture,
4.dxe5
is necessary as the first capture, since 4.Nxe5 loses a piece to 4...dxe5.
Example 2:
1.d4 d5 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.Nc3 b6 4.e3 c5 5.Be2 Qc7 6.dxc5 bxc5
. What should White’s 7th move be?
White to play after 6...bxc5
I suspect you got the correct answer is to win a pawn by capturing:
7.Nxd5
.
Example 3: In the following position, what should White play, and why?
White to play
Again, it is easy.
1.Rxd5
wins back the pawn,
while 1.Qxd5?? loses material.
From the preceding examples, what rule/principle can you generalize that would help a player find the right move?
The answer which superficially seems reasonable is: ‘When multiple pieces can capture on a guarded square, start by capturing with the piece worth the least.’
The problem is that
there is no such principle
, or at least you should understand that this ‘principle’ could only be applied in certain types of situations, primarily if the defending piece(s) are worth less than some of the pieces that might capture, but equal or greater to others. In each of the examples above, the first capturing piece was worth exactly equal to the lowest valued (or only) defender. But, in those cases the calculation is trivial (as it should have been). However, when the decision on which piece to first capture is not trivial, using this ‘principle’ will often lead you astray.
In Chapter Seven of his interesting book
Move First and Think Later
, Willy Hendriks discusses how one can develop/show false principles by using misleading examples: “If White advances with g4, block his aggression with ...g5.” He shows how one can provide seemingly typical examples to back up your ‘principle’ and mislead the reader toward false conclusions, comparable to what I just did.
The following diagram, Example 4, is similar to Example 2:
1.d4 d5 2.Nf3 b6 3.Nc3 c5 4.dxc5 bxc5
. What should White’s 5th move be?
White to play after 4...bxc5
When I give this and similar positions to students, most suggest that again 5.Nxd5 is correct. When I ask why, the two most common answers are: “Take with the least valuable piece first”, and “Don’t develop the queen too early.”
The problem with the first answer is, as we shall see, the principle does not exist; the problem with the second answer is that it does not mean much, since any principle with ‘too’ is almost self-defining and thus meaningless. For example, ‘don’t grow your business too fast’ or ‘don’t take too many risks in your investments’ don’t tell you how much you can do, since doing so below this unknown threshold may clearly be beneficial. In chess, if bringing out the queen early in a certain situation is good, then clearly it is not ‘too early’.
But neither of these objections mean that 5.Nxd5 is incorrect. They just mean that we still do not have meaningful criteria to decide. However, in this position
5.Qxd5 is much better because:
• The knight is already well-placed, and the queen is undeveloped, so get another piece into the game, everything else being equal.
• You do not want to pin your own pieces. After 5.Nxd5 the knight is not technically pinned to the queen, but it’s an awkward set-up where if the knight moves, trading queens might lose castling rights.
• Most importantly,
when ahead, trade pieces not necessarily pawns
.
The most important piece to trade is the queen. Here White is very wisely offering to Black the very annoying, and helpful for White, ‘Trade or retreat!’ option that is an important part of good technique. Black can’t very well decline since avoiding the trade of queens means that Black has to deal with 6.Qxa8. After 5...Qxd5 6.Nxd5 White is ahead a pawn in a queenless middlegame, is ahead in development, and has a better pawn structure to boot.
It’s not that 5.Nxd5 is bad (the engine evaluates 5.Nxd5 at about +2.5, but 5.Qxd5 at almost +6.5!),it is just that, unless you are a very strong player, you should learn to desire trading queens when you are winning (unless you have only a slight material lead and the opponent’s king is exposed, often a clear exception). Trading queens is an important step toward winning by attrition when ahead.
Black to play and win.
Hint: Black should not capture with the lowest valued piece!
The bottom line:
if capturing with something worth more than the least valuable piece is safe, then there are no guidelines; only analysis can decide which capturing order is optimum
. There are many, many positions when taking with the least valuable piece is clearly incorrect, so many that any ‘principle’ suggesting that you must would be misguided. Final Example 5: A student showed me this ‘Black to play and win’ position from one of his tactics sets (
see previous diagram)
:
Solution:
1...Rxe4 2.Rxe4 f5
, and if
3.Rg4 fxg4
(3...Bxf3?? 4.Rxg5). So, next time someone quotes “Take with the lowest valued piece first”, please realize this is quite a restricted (I prefer non-existent) principle. Following this advice in positions when taking with more valuable pieces is safe can often lead you to incorrect strategic – and possibly tactically questionable – decisions.
Tip 105
Kudos to Charles Hertan for creating the name ‘sneaky pin’ in his clever book
Power Chess for Kids
. Knowing the idea of sneaky pins can help your board vision; giving it a catchy name helps someone learn (and teach!) it.
Here is a position I give to my students to illustrate a sneaky pin:
White to play
Some students attempt to stop 1...Qg2# with 1.Ne3??,
but most get the point and eventually find
1.Qxg6#
, which is a ‘sneaky pin’ because it is not attacking the pinned f-pawn, but rather capturing on a square that the pinned piece is not really guarding. Notice how putting the white light-squared bishop and queen as far away as possible from their kingside targets makes the ‘board vision’ aspect tougher.
A good definition of a sneaky pin is: a move that does not attack a pinned piece, but takes advantage of its inability (or lesser ability) to guard a square. In the position above, it is the f-pawn that is pinned by the bishop on a2, so it is unable to capture the queen on g6.
These types of moves are often ‘invisible’ (difficult to see) for lower-rated players; sneaky pins are probably the most common type of these moves, but they are prevalent enough there is an entire book devoted to them:
Invisible Chess Moves
by Neiman and Afek.
Here is another sneaky pin, modeled on one I saw yesterday in an online simultaneous exhibition:
White to play
White played
1.Nxe5
as the pinned d-pawn can (unlike the previous example) legally take the knight, but if Black does so, he will lose a queen and pawn for a rook and knight. Instead, Black chose to settle for just losing the e-pawn.
I taught this type of pattern for years, but, to my dismay, never thought to give it a name! Once I saw NM Hertan’s clever naming, my first thought was ‘Why didn’t I think of that?’ So now I tip my hat to Charles and, when I teach this pattern, I never fail to call it a sneaky pin. Moreover, I can confidently state that my students remember – and recognize – it better now that it has a memorable name.
Tip 106
Don’t always immediately capture pinned pieces.
Let’s consider why immediately taking pinned pieces, even if it wins material, is often incorrect:
• The pinned piece usually cannot move and the pinning piece can, so you are trading a more active piece for a less active one.
• To get out of the pin will cost the defender a tempo, so wait until they spend that tempo and then possibly capture the piece.
• Instead of capturing, putting more pressure on the pinned piece may end up winning (additional) material.
What are some of the exceptions where you might capture a pinned piece immediately?
• If the defender has a defensive tactic that will cause the pin to be destroyed or useless if you wait a move.
• If there is an immediate tactic that can only be initiated by making the capture on this move.
• If there is some sort of positional advantage that may disappear if the capture is not made this move.
Here are some examples:
White to play
In this type of position, low-rated players think ‘I can win a queen for a bishop with 1.Bxg7+ and that is excellent for me so I should do it!’. But the queen is not going anywhere so taking it right away is not always so advantageous. In this case if White plays 1.Bxg7+? Kxg7 2.Ng3 Black can defend his h-pawn with 2...Kg6 and the resulting endgame up a pawn can be challenging to win.
But if instead White plays
1.Ng3
then Black must spend a tempo to get out of the pin with either
1...Kh7
or 1...Kg8 or even 1...Qxc3. But if Black moves the king, White will then play
2.Bxg7 Kxg7 3.Nxh5+
and be ahead two pawns with a much easier win. Taking the queen right away cost an important tempo.
In the following example, what would you play?
White to play
White can certainly win the exchange (i.e. winning a rook for a bishop or a knight) by playing 1.Bxf7+. But what’s the rush? When you see a good move, look for a better one.
What are other candidate moves? White cannot immediately attack the rook additional times because e7 is guarded and for the knight to get to e5, it would have to go through f3, where ...Bxf3 might be possible. But since White has a pin, maybe he should look for another one! How about
1.Bd5
, threatening 2.Bxc6? It is much better to win a piece than the exchange. The knight can’t move because if it did, the rook on a8 would be unguarded and 2.Bxa8 would win an entire rook. But no other piece can guard the knight, so
1.
B
d5
is far superior to 1.Bxf7+.
Let’s change things a bit; suppose we take away White’s tactic by starting the black knight at a7:
White to play
Even with this change, 1.Bxf7+ is still incorrect;
instead, White should put more pressure on the rook with
1.Re7!
.
This result is consistent with our tip; the rook will not run away, so the bishop is not only the more active piece, but the delay in capturing ties up the black army defending the pinned rook and (in many similar circumstances) might win more material.
Tip 107
Do not always immediately capture forked/double attacked pieces.
This principle is very similar to the previous one about not always capturing pinned pieces right away, and some of the same ideas and logic applies. So long as neither of the two pieces move, it may be more beneficial to wait until the opponent wastes a tempo trying to save one of them (assuming they are both of equal value) to capture the other. This is easily demonstrated when a knight forks two rooks:
White to play
Suppose we have a fork such as the above with many more pieces on the board for each side (material even before the fork). Then if White immediately plays 1.Nxa8
or 1.Nxe8, the other rook will recapture. But if White can safely delay, instead making a constructive move elsewhere and enticing Black to make a tempo move like either rook to c8, then White can capture the rook that did not move and win a tempo.
Such a position often becomes a game of ‘chicken’ where Black refuses to waste a tempo moving the rook and White responds by not capturing. However, White must be very careful when not capturing to make sure Black does not develop a defensive tactic (such as one of the rooks getting a check or a counter-threat), and then White does not win anything. When in doubt, just make the initial capture!
Another note is that if White does have the choice of which rook to capture when the other rook will recapture, it is almost always correct to take the
less
powerful rook! This seeming illogic is easily explained: if White captures the less powerful rook, the more powerful rook will have to recapture, thus moving the more powerful rook to the less powerful square.
Tip 108
If you are attempting a mating attack and looking for candidate moves, obviously you want to consider safe checks, but also sacrificial checks, moves that put your queen closer to the opposing king, and moves that bring an additional piece into the attack, even without check.
In the following position White has sacrificed a bishop for Black’s g- and h-pawns, exposing Black’s king. How can he best continue the attack?
White to play
Best play for both sides could be:
1.Ng3
Getting the knight into the attack and threatening Ng3-h5 in many lines.
1...Qe7
Getting ready to play ...Qe6 to defend the kingside.
2.a4!
The furthest away piece threatens to make an entrance with Ra1-a3.
2...Qe6
Queen trade anyone?
3.Qd2
Not in this type of position with the exposed black king and Black ahead on material!
3...f5
Weakening squares around the king, but giving necessary access to them for defense.
4.a5 Nd7 5.Bc4
Another piece activated.
5...Rf7 6.Ra3
Here it comes!
6...Rh7 7.Qg5+ Kh8 8.Nxf5
A third pawn for the piece.
8...Nf8 9.Nd6 Qe7
Black finally neutralizes the attack, but at the cost of a crucial fourth pawn.
10.Qxe7 Nxe7 11.Nxc8 Rxc8 12.Rxe4
The engine rates this position as +3.7.
Let’s start with a similar position, but change around just a few things and see how much that affects ‘best play’. The same principles apply, but lead to completely different moves:
White to play
1.Bd3
The bishop enters the attack with the threat of mate on h7.
1...f5
Forced to block the line.
2.exf6
Opening up lines for the attack.
2...Rxf6 3.Qh7+
Getting the queen closer restricts Black’s options.
3...Kf8 4.Ne4 Ng8
Black must give up the exchange (rook for minor piece). Instead, 4...Rf7 5.Qh8+ Ng8 6.Nd6 is even worse.
5.Nxf6 Ngxf6 6.Qh6+ Ke7 7.Re5
Not only clearing the way for the other rook to participate, but also allowing this rook to swing to the kingside in many lines.
7...Qf8 8.Qh4
Trading queens was also good, but in general you don’t want to trade queens when the king is exposed until the material situation is clearly in your favor.
8...Bd7 9.Rh5 Kd6 10.Qg3+ Ke7 11.Rg5 Qh6 12.Re1
The final piece has entered the play; although there is no longer serious danger to the black king, the damage has been done.
12...Rf8
Again the engine’s ‘perfect’ defense has averted the worst, but White is evaluated as close to winning with a +2.3 score.
I could have started each example with slight alterations that would have given White a quick win. For example, instead of the knight on d2 in the diagram, if it had been on c3, the engine gives the rook lift 1.Nxd5 (removing the guard of the e3-square) 1...exd5 (1...Nxd5 2.Qg5+ is mate in five after 2...Kh7 3.Re4) 2.Re3 as an immediate win. However, for the purposes of illustrating this tip, I wanted not just ‘play and mate’ positions, but rather more competitive ones where Black could defend, while White could keep up the attack by following many of the suggested attacking ideas.
Tip 109
Another good tip in mating attacks is to consider first making moves that block the opposing king’s escape squares rather than checking that king into those squares and then continue checking. If the lines with continuous checking do not work, sometimes the ‘don’t check but instead block the escape first’ plan does quite well.
Lower-rated players love to quickly follow the somewhat tongue-in-cheek principle ‘Always check, it might be mate’. But although checking is the most forceful type of move and many mating sequences consist entirely of checks, persistent checking is not always the best continuation.
Here is a clear example illustrating a not-so-rare situation when continuing to check does not work as well as first blocking the escape square:
White to play
White can continue with a series of checks: for example, 1.Qh8+? Ke7 2.Re1+ Kd7 3.Rd1+ Kc6, but that is just forcing the black king into the safety of the queenside and then Black’s extra rook will easily be decisive.
Therefore White should instead first cut off the Black king’s access to the e-file with
1.Re1!
, which threatens 2.Qh8# and leads to mate in five at the most, and that’s only if Black starts throwing away pieces:
1...Qe5 2.Rxe5 Rd1+ 3.Kh2 Rh1+ 4.Kxh1
any 5.Qh8#.
Tip 110
When doing an advanced puzzle or composition, keep in mind the ‘non-normal’ moves like castling, en passant, and under-promotion. These often form part of the answer, as they can escape the normal player’s board vision and make the solution more difficult or seem impossible.
The diagram on the next page is a problem composed by Karl Faber in 1950:
At first this problem seems easy: the two rooks should be able to do a corridor mate on the kingside. But you cannot place the black king where it is already in check because then it could not be White’s move.
If you place the black king on the f-file with the idea of 1.Rf1#, where would it go? If it’s too close, like f3, then 1.Rf1+ is met by 1...Kxg2. But place the black king any further away on the f-file and 1.Rf1+ is met by a bishop interposition.
White to play: Place the black king on the board and mate in 1
Therefore, without today’s tip the problem might seem impossible. But notice the position of the white king on e1 and the rook on h1. This placement brings up the FIDE Composition Rule: “If in a puzzle if it looks as though one side can castle, then castling is legal unless retrograde analysis proves that it is not legal.”
So that means 1.0-0 is legal. Does it help? It certainly does, since now the white king is guarding g2, so place the black king on f3 and then 1.0-0 is mate!
Here is a ‘retrograde’ problem by Dr. Niels Hoeg from 1916:
What was the previous move?
Black is in check, so White must have made the last move. But the checking bishop only has one diagonal, so it could not have come from another diagonal. If the rows and columns were not labeled, it might be possible that White is on top and the bishop is not on a1 but h8, when the answer could be h7-h8=B+! (under-promotion!). But since the columns
are
labeled, this cannot be the solution.
Maybe something has moved to discover a check on the black king. That can’t be the white king, so it would have to be the e6-pawn. But if it moved normally on White’s last move, it came from e5, where it is already checking the king, so the last move could not have been e4-e5+. Does that mean there can be no answer? No, my other tip was en passant.
Suppose the bishop had got to a1 earlier:
White to play
Only now did White play
1.d4-d5+ (1.d5+)
. Black responded
1...e7-e5
(1...e5)
then White played
2.dxe6
en passant, creating this position legally! So that is the answer.
For our final example, here is a mate in two; composition by Dowd (2011):
White to play and mate in 2
Getting a second queen on the first or second move sure looks promising, but another tip is:
In advanced, composed mate-in-2 problems, the first move is almost never a check
. If that advice holds for this composition, then 1.d8=Q+, the move most of us would play in a game with our clock running, is extremely unlikely to be the first move of the solution. 1.d8=Q+ Kc5 and there’s no immediate mate.
So, what’s next? Notice that if White does nothing (null move hypothesis), then if 1...Ke4 2.Qf3#. That’s probably part of the solution, but how does White move on the first move to mate after a defense like 1...Kc5?
Then Qc6 would be the only mating square if it were guarded, but the only way to guard it is with
1.d8=
N. But does that work against other defenses than 1...Kf3 or 1...Kc5? Let’s check on that:
1.d8=N e4 2.Qd4#
or
1.d8=
N,
1...c6 (or 1...c5) 2.Qxc6#. Black only has five legal moves after
1.d8=
N and we’ve got them all: solution!
This kind of problem often proves very difficult for lower-rated players. When questioned they usually say things like “I never think about under-promotion” – but now you should!
Chapter Five
Positional Concepts and Strategy
The tips in this chapter address a variety of non-tactical issues involving assessing positions, finding good strategy, and implementing appropriate plans. Some of the tips revolve around the central issue of how to make your pieces as active/mobile/powerful as possible, both individually and in coordination with the other pieces. The tips also include other issues such as square strength/weakness and pawn structure.
Tip 111
Use all your pieces all the time!
It is strange that this principle (which I derive, if not steal, from Steinitz) is not more well-known. Amazingly, its corollaries are better known, such as:
• Find your worse piece and make it better (Tip #112).
• In the opening, move every piece once before you move any piece twice, unless there is a tactic (Tip #144).
• In the endgame, the king is a strong piece: use it (Tips #155 and #156).
Lower-rated players have trouble with these principles. They are lured by ‘having a better idea’, moving the same pieces repeatedly (grandmasters and engines do occasionally too, with a more discerning eye). But I have found that it takes a rating of about 1700 FIDE before players purposely ignoring basic principles can do so with at least a 50% chance of being right. Moral of the story: If you are a low-rated player, better to follow general principles than have a better idea!
In other sports everyone knows you always use the maximum force (number of players) allowed. In basketball, no one purposely plays with fewer than five players on the court. But in chess, lower-rated players are enticed by ‘early attacks’ and often do not want to ‘waste time’ getting all their pieces (often their second most powerful pieces, rooks) into the game.
In the following game a student, playing Black, managed to find attractive moves without ever moving one of his three most powerful pieces (queen and rooks). Hint: castling is considered a king move:
1.d4 Nf6 2.Nf3 e6 3.g3 d5 4.Bg2 b6
Probably better to get ready to castle by moving the king bishop first.
5.0-0 Bb7 6.Bg5 Nbd7 7.Ne5 c5 8.c3 Be7 9.Nd2 h6 10.Be3 0-0 11.Ndf3 Ne4
The engine is already suggesting that the natural 11...Rc8 is good, backing up the previous ...c5 break and a potentially semi-open file.
12.h3 a5 13.Nh2 b5 14.f3?? Nxg3
It is OK not to develop when you have a tactic, even an easy one like capturing an en prise pawn.
15.Rf2 b4 16.Nhg4 Nf5 17.Bxh6?
Now Black is too busy to finish development.
17...gxh6 18.Qd2 Bg5 19.f4 Bf6 20.Raf1 Nxe5 21.dxe5 Bg7
White to play after 21...
B
g7
Black is ahead a piece and won easily (I cannot remember when White resigned). To be fair, almost all of Black’s moves in this game were reasonable, but many of my students’ games are less so.
Of the first 700 or so students who had to be taught “move every piece once before you move any piece twice, unless there is a tactic” only one(!) was able to start doing it consistently from the time he was taught. Others, of course, were able to do it eventually, but only after they spent time ‘having a better idea’.
One problem is that when two weaker players play each other, and neither develops all his pieces, the game seems perfectly competitive to both parties, so they continue game after game in that manner. I learned a little the hard way too: once I got to about 1700 and was paired with 1900s, I found that if I wasted any moves in the opening, the 1900+ opponents started making threats and I was often unable to ever get all my pieces out. I was a little like the Little Dutch Boy futilely trying to plug the growing holes in the dyke. There is something to be said about playing strong enough opposition to punish your mistakes!
Another strong related tip is:
Make sure all your pieces have a future!
When deciding on various plans and pawn structures, make sure all your pieces can participate. Do not put knights where they have no path to become active, do not block in your (bad) bishops with fixed pawns, make sure rooks have access to open lines, and be willing and able to activate the king as soon as it is safe to do so. You can’t use all your pieces well if there’s no way to activate them.
Tip 112
Find your worst piece and make it better.
We first encountered this tip as a corollary of the previous tip #111,
Use all your pieces all the time.
If you are not initiating or preventing a tactic, you often want to improve the positions of your pieces, and you often get the most bang for your buck (tempo!) by improving your worst positioned piece.
I tell my students to think of ‘Find your worst piece and make it better’ as sort of a chessic game of leapfrog. In that game the player at the back of the line ‘leaps’ over all the (leaning) players in front of him to become the leader of the line. Similarly, if you can make your worst piece much better, it leaves another piece to be the worst piece next time, so your pieces take turns coordinating to continually better squares. Yes, this is an over-simplification of what often happens, but conceptually it is a good way to think about what you are commonly trying to do, sans tactic.
I know this tip is a big help to many students because, just as I am often reminding them “Don’t have a better idea; just move every piece once before you move every piece twice, unless there’s a tactic,” when they ask which piece should be developed next, I commonly reply: “Find your worst piece and make it better.”
For many amateurs, the worst piece early in the game is often a rook that is either left in the corner or castled, but not further activated (castling is considered a king move, not a rook move, too). But the worst piece in an opening could just as well be a dormant queen, a bad bishop, or a wayward knight.
Here is a recent student game where pieces vie for the ‘worst piece’ title throughout the early stages; my student was White:
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 Nc6 4.Nf3 Nge7 5.c3 Ng6 6.h4 h5 7.Bd3 Nce7 8.Bg5 Nf4??
Deciding the game, but not ruining it for our purposes, as it contains good examples of this tip.
9.Bxf4 g6 10.b4 b6 11.0-0 Bb7 12.Na3
The knight becomes wayward.
12...Bg7 13.Qd2 Qd7 14.Bb5
This is not a tactic and the bishop was fine on d3; instead the engine prefers to make the worst pieces better with 14.Nc2 or 14.Rfb1.
14...c6 15.Bd3 0-0-0
What should White’s plan be here and what piece should he move next?
White to play after 15...0-0-0
This would now be a typical ‘castled opposite sides with queens on the board’ position (Tip #116), except White is already ahead a piece, so most reasonable plans win! Nevertheless, White should figure out a way to generate action on the queenside. The engine’s top move for starting this (and activating the worst piece) is 16.Nc2, intending if 16...Nf5 then the thematic 17.a4. Instead, White played:
16.Bg5
Another bishop sortie comparable to the one on the 14th move. 16.Bg5 is not a terrible move; Black is weak on the dark squares on the kingside. However, it is on the wrong side of the board. We could consider the knight on a3 to be the worst piece and the rook on f1 to be second worst. The other rook on a1 is at least on the right side of the board and if the errant knight moves then a2-a4 will nicely activate that rook.
16...Rde8 17.Qe2
Still not activating the worst pieces. The top three moves are 17.c4, 17.Nc2, and 17.Rfb1, all queenside moves and two of them activate the worst pieces.
17...b5 18.Bf6
Again the wrong side of the board.
The top three moves are 18.Nb1, 18.Rfe1, and 18.Nc2. Seeing the trend here about activating worst pieces?
18...Rh7(?) 19.Ng5
This move is, at least, a removal of the guard tactic.
19...Reh8 20.Nxh7 Rxh7 21.Bxg7 Rxg7 22.Nc2
At last! Virtually tied for best move.
22...Nf5 23.Bxf5 exf5 24.f4
White is now ahead a rook so he just has to be careful not to allow the entire board to be blocked by pawns.
24...Rh7 25.Ne1 Qe7 26.Nf3 f6
Helping White by allowing a line to open, but Black’s position was hopeless anyway.
27.Rfe1 Kb8 28.exf6 Qxf6 29.Qe5+ Qxe5 30.Nxe5 Rg7 31.Re3 Kc7 32.Rg3 a5 33.bxa5 Kd6 34.Rxg6+ Rxg6 35.Nxg6 c5 36.a3 cxd4 37.cxd4 Ke6 38.Re1+ Kf6 39.Ne7 Ba8 40.Re5 1-0
Tip 113
IM Jeremy Silman suggests that for a plan to be strongly considered, it must be both feasible (doable) and effective.
I am always quick to give other instructors credit when they have a good idea, and if they are excellent instructors, most of their ideas are going to be good!
As IM John Watson has suggested in his advanced book
Secrets of Modern Chess Strategy
, most ‘plans’ in chess are not very long-term grandiose ones that formulate in the opening and carry you to victory 70 moves later. Rather, they are mini-plans that suggest how to get something done over the next several moves, like obtain a knight outpost, control and open files, or get a pawn majority rolling.
But whether the plan is long-term and grandiose, or whether it is short-term and mundane,
if the plan is seriously to be considered, it should meet Silman’s criteria: feasible and effective.
If it lacks one or the other, then it probably should be discarded and another idea found.
I use an old friend as an example. He was a weak player who loved to attack his opponent’s king. Therefore, he would spend several tempi marching his pieces over to the areas around his opponent’s king, no matter whether the position called for such a maneuver or not (one of Steinitz’s rules is that you must attack where you have an advantage, but if you attack where you do not have an advantage it will fail to proper defense). Take a typical Queen’s Gambit Declined position:
White to play
I am making this example up, but it is not farfetched, having seen many of his games in similar situations. My friend would think ‘If I can get my queen to g3 and put my bishop on h6, then I am threatening checkmate!’ Let’s apply Silman’s two criteria:
Is it feasible? If Black absolutely wants to stop this maneuver at some point, he could just play a move like ...Kg8-h8, so that Bg5-h6 would not be safe. There are other ways for Black to stop White from setting up this pattern, but it is possible that Black might even allow it, because...
Is it effective? No! Even if White achieves Qg3 and Bh6, Black can easily stop the mate and White has no effective follow-up.
Let’s make some innocuous moves for Black that allow White to play Qg3 and Bh6, and then let the engine defend:
1.Nh4 Bb7 2.Qf3 Rc8 3.Qg3 a6 4.Bh6
.
Black to play after 4.
B
h6
Black can now easily defend with 4...Ne8 and White’s pieces are looking a little silly, since there is no follow-up. But even better is
4...Nh5!
which stops the mate, attacks the queen, and discovers a threat on the knight on h4. So even if White’s plan was feasible, it would violate Steinitz’s rule that you cannot successfully attack where you do not have an advantage (Tip #115) and would, not surprisingly, be ineffective.
Therefore, any time you have a plan, make sure that it is both feasible and effective. That does not necessarily make it the best plan, but at least it makes it worth further consideration.
Tip 114
Don’t give up something for nothing.
When you watch or study master games, the games are not always balanced, but the players attempt to trade imbalances of at least roughly equal value to keep their chances alive. Examples of these imbalances might include:
• A lead in development.
• The advantage of the bishop-pair (possessing both bishops and the opponent does not).
• A superior pawn structure.
• A safer king.
• Possession of an open line, like an open file.
• Control of an outpost square.
• A superior minor piece.
So when offering to give up one or more of these (and other) imbalances, strong players attempt, and usually succeed, in getting in return one or more others. If they see they can’t get an equal imbalance in return, they are not going to give the opponent an imbalance advantage unless they are outplayed and forced to do so.
But amateurs often give up these advantages for little or nothing in return, so that makes their games look quite different. For example, they may not covet or understand the advantage of the bishop-pair and may give it to their opponent for no real compensation. Take the following example from a recent student game:
White to play after 12...
R
e8
In this position White has slightly more than a normal opening advantage. The engine prefers
13.Bb5
, e.g.
13...a6?! 14.Bxd7 Nxd7 15.Bxe7 Rxe7 16.dxc5 Nxc5
with play against the isolated queen’s pawn (IQP), or 13...Rf8 14.h3 c4 15.Ne5 with about a half-pawn advantage.
Instead, White played
13.Bxf6
, giving Black the bishop-pair after
13...Nxf6
. When I asked him why he did this, he replied that he wanted to capture on c5, but did not want the knight on d7 to recapture there and hit his d3-bishop. This is a reasonable concern, but with better understanding, this is not nearly sufficient reason to give up the valuable bishop-pair to his opponent.
On average the bishop-pair is worth about half a pawn
, and
Stockfish
drops White’s evaluation after 13.Bxf6 from about half a pawn ahead to about a tenth of a pawn behind, meaning White lost the full value of the bishop-pair without any compensation.
In the following position White, rated about 1500, was in a book position in the English Opening against a lower-rated player:
Position after 5...
B
e6
Normally White plays
6.Nf3
here with a normal white opening advantage.
But White wanted to drive away the centralized black knight and played the anti-positional
6.e4?
, blocking the g2-bishop and weakening the d3- and d4-squares. Thereupon, after the natural
6...Nb4
, White has given Black targets on those severely weakened squares for ‘negative’ compensation and has no defense to the coming ...Nb4-d3+. The engine says White is already lost. He was so shocked that he quickly played the unsafe
7.d3?
and after
7...Nxd3+
he lost a pawn and the right to castle. A few moves later he blundered again and resigned. When I later asked White about this game, he said it was the worst game he ever played...
Tip 115
Steinitz said you cannot win a fight where you do not already have some advantage.
World champion (1886-1894) Wilhelm Steinitz is the father of much positional theory and strategy. Most of Steinitz’s theories are based on common sense – and even later, game theory – and have held up through the years.
One of his general ideas is that you cannot make something out of nothing; in other words, in order to attack in some area of the board, you need to have an advantage of some type in that area. The advantage can come in the form of more material/power in that area (often due to a lead in development), or opponent’s weaknesses like a wrecked pawn structure, weak squares, loose pieces, an over-exposed king, or really any of the Seeds of Tactical Destruction (Tip #100).
Steinitz also implied that if you have a lead in time/development and do nothing, then that lead in development will dissipate as the opponent has time to catch up in activation and mobility. It therefore follows that when you have some lead in time, you need to ‘attack’ (that is, take some positive action; it does not have to be an ‘attack’ in the sense of ‘attack a king’), to try to win material, checkmate, or possibly transfer your advantage to another more permanent type, like converting a lead in development into a superior pawn structure. This transferring of advantage was a central idea in GM Larry Evans book
New Ideas in Chess
.
If you must ‘attack’ when you have an advantage, then it follows that if you do not have the advantage, an attack is not called for, for it must fail against proper defense. This leads to the saying
a premature attack is doomed to failure
. We could extend this to, say, any attack where there is no advantage is doomed to failure against proper defense.
Jeff Coakley is one of the best chess authors and he summarizes a basic description of Steinitz’s theory in his section ‘Logic of Chess’ on page 202 of his excellent introduction to strategy book
Winning Chess Strategy for Kids
. Like many chess books that have in the title “for Kids”, it is
not
just for kids, but helpful for any improving player who needs to learn good, fundamental material. You can’t always judge a book by its cover – or its title.
Tip 116
When castled on opposite sides with queens on the board, the initiative is usually the most important factor and the strategy is to ‘throw the kitchen sink’ at the opponent’s king, and whoever gets there first usually wins.
A corollary to this tip is that material does not matter as much, at least less than the initiative, when both kings are targets (Tip #117). In fact, sometimes winning a pawn in front of your own king can be helpful to the opponent if it opens lines for his/her rooks and/or queen toward your king.
In castled on opposite sides positions, sacrificing a pawn in front of the opponent’s king when there are queens and/or rooks to take advantage is a standard device:
Position after 10.0-0-0(?)
Even though Counting tells us that the pawn break
10...b5!
is not safe since it is attacked three times and defended only once, whether White captures or not, Black can thematically use that move as a sacrifice to force open lines on the queenside and get the initiative there first, e.g.
11.axb5?
(better is 11.Ba2, but after 11...Be6 12.Bxe6 Rxe6 13.Nf3 Bb4 Black is still much better, possibly winning)
11...axb5 12.Bxb5
(12.Nxb5?? Ra1#)
12...Ra1+ 13.Nb1 Bd7 14.Ne2 Nb4
, threatening the smothered mate 15...Na2# and Black has a winning attack.
A good guideline for these opposite-side castling positions is:
If the overwhelming majority of the moves are being played on one side (kingside or queenside) of the board, the player whose king is on that side will very likely lose
(or be losing).
Game 2 of the well-known book
My 60 Memorable Games is
Fischer-Larsen, Portoroz 1958. After White’s 16th move, Fischer writes about his Yugoslav Dragon Sicilian position, which featured the typical opposite sides castling:
Black to play after 16.
B
b3
“I’d won dozens of skittles games in analogous positions and had it down to a science: pry open the KR-file [king’s rook = h-file] sac, sac...mate!”
This one sentence tells you three important things:
• One of the best ways to learn openings is to play many, many speed/skittles games to get experience (Tip #134).
• When castling on opposite sides, open lines and go after the opponent’s king as fast as possible.
• In castled on opposite sides positions, material is not as important as the initiative; Fischer’s willingness to sacrifice shows that he understood that purposeful material loss in these types of positions is not only acceptable, but a standard way of ‘opening up’ the opposing king for mating attacks.
The game continued:
16...Rc7 17.h4 Qb5 18.h5 Rfc8 19.hxg6 hxg6 20.g4 a5 21.g5 Nh5 22.Rxh5 gxh5? 23.g6
, with a decisive attack. In his book Fischer gives the variation 22...Bxd4 23.Qxd4 gxh5 24.g6 and now he writes that both 24...Qe5 and 24...e6 fail, which is true. However, Fischer therefore concludes that 22...Bxd4 is “no better”, which is not so because modern engines have found that Black can improve on the 24th move of that variation with 22...Bxd4 23.Qxd4 gxh5 24.g6 Rc4! when White’s advantage is only minimal.
Castling opposite sides often leads to critical positions with both sides attacking, and it is easy to make mistakes!
Tip 117
If both kings are heavily exposed, the initiative is often more important than the material balance.
Mate outweighs material, so if both kings are exposed and both sides have mating possibilities, stopping to pick up material and, in doing so, letting your opponent get a strong initiative by allowing him/her to check first can be dangerous, to put it mildly. Sometimes when both kings are exposed, a mating sequence that starts with a series of checks, even if sacrifices are required, may be the best alternative.
Here is an excellent example; I think it may have been from an old game by a student.
Black to play
In this position Black is already ahead the exchange and a pawn, but if he gets materialistic and picks up that ‘free’ bishop, his exposed king will prove fatal, e.g. 1...Qxh4? 2.Bc4+ (best to get another piece into the attack; Tip #108) 2...Kg7 3.Rg1+ Bg2 4.Rxg2+ (the rook on h2 is overworked) 4...Rxg2 5.Qxh4 and if Black tries to equalize the material with 5...Rxc4 then 6.Qe7+ Kh8 (moving the king to the sixth rank loses the rook on c4 to 7.Qe6+, as does 6...Kg8) 7.Qf8+ Rg8 (7...Kh7 8.Qf7+ again wins the rook on c4) 8.Qh6#.
So rather than win material, give some. It is better to give than receive – well, sometimes. Black wins with:
1...Rxf2+! 2.Kd1
(if 2.Bxf2 Qxh5+ or 2.Kxf2 Qg2#)
2...Qxd3+
(of course 2...Bf3+ wins too)
3.cxd3 Ba4#
.
Also winning easily is the sneaky pin (Tip #105) 1...Qe3+ 2.Kd1 (if 2.Kf1 Rh1#) 2...Bf3+ 3.Be2 Qxe2+ (3...Bxh5 wins too) 4.Rxe2 Bxh5.
Tip 118
The most common way to win a game is to use a tactic to get ahead on material and then win by attrition (using ‘technique’).
Studying checkmate problems is obviously very important because if you miss a checkmate, either on offense or defense, that can easily cost you the game. Therefore, you get a lot of bang for your study buck from studying them.
However, in anyone’s career the percentage of games they win by checkmate when the material is even (or they are behind) is very small, especially beyond the beginner stage. The overwhelming majority of games are won when one player wins material and the other player eventually resigns, or the player ahead on material increases his/her advantage by attrition (making fair trades = simplifying) until the advantage is so great he/she can either checkmate, or promote a pawn to a queen and then use the queen to checkmate.
The fact that most games are won by first winning material, even a pawn, is one reason I like to initially emphasize tactical problem sets that contain mostly (but not all!) problems that win material over ones that have a high percentage of checkmate problems. Sacrificing your queen for a pretty checkmate gets high marks for fun and helps sell a considerable number of tactics books and tactical software. However, the number of serious games you will win in your lifetime with a spectacular queen sacrifice from an otherwise even-material position is quite small compared to the number of games you will (or should) win once you use a tactic to get ahead on material.
We call winning a won game ‘technique’. The better technique you have and the more your opponents perceive your technique, the earlier they will resign. While some of the tips in this book (#67, 85, 86, and 119) deal directly with how to play when way ahead (a well-known principle is ‘When ahead in material, make fair trades of pieces, but not necessarily pawns’), a host of other tips and principles also indirectly help, as does both inexact and exact endgame knowledge.
An ‘exact’ endgame is one with only a few pieces on the board where a standard technique is used to achieve an aim like win or draw. Examples would be how to checkmate with a king and queen versus a king or whether a king and pawn versus king position is a win or draw, and how to achieve that result.
Two of the tactics books that I think have (i.) the proper balance of problem for winning material to those that pursue checkmate, (ii.) a consistent level for post-beginner study, and (iii.) positions that commonly occur in games, and are thus more effective to study are Giannatos’s
Everyone’s First Chess Workbook
and Bain’s
Chess Tactics for Students
. Of course, there are others, but those are the first two I recommend.
Tip 119
When you are way ahead in a game, the ‘trade or retreat’ idea is helpful.
For example, if you are ahead a pawn and an opponent’s rook controls an open file, you can often safely put a rook on that file and offer a trade. He either must trade (good for you), or give you the file (retreating; also good).
The following position illustrates this:
White to play
I think most players would realize they can successfully play
1.Rc1
, putting Black between a rock – moving the rook off the c-file and ceding entry to White – and a hard place, trading rooks into a clearly lost king and pawn endgame.
Although this example is easy to understand, similar logic could have been applied if there were more pieces on the board and, when White challenged the file, Black was not facing a lost king and pawn endgame. So unless White was offering a trade into, say, a bishop of opposite colors endgame, with most material advantages a move similar to 1.Rc1 above would still be the right idea.
Although opposing on a file is a typical and easy example, many other trade offers when ahead on material illustrate this ‘trade or retreat’ idea. The key is that the opponent has no wonderful place to move when avoiding the trade; if he/she did, it would no longer constitute a retreat!
Here is an example with a centralizing queen instead of a rook:
Black to play
White is double-attacking the pawns on c4 and a7, but the ‘trade or retreat’ answer
1...Qc5
not only protects all the pawns, but either forces White’s queen to a less advantageous position or a trade into a rather futile bishop of the same color endgame down a pawn.
Now an example where the option is not a retreat, so the idea does not work:
Black to play
Black is winning easily and White is triple-attacking a7, c3 and e5. Black can centralize and save all with 1...Qd4??, but then 2.Qh6 threatening an unstoppable mate is not a retreat!
Instead, Black should play 1...Kh8,
1...Nd5
or 1...Qf5.
Tip 120
The value of a tempo varies greatly. At the start of a game, it could be worth around one-third of a pawn. But in complicated positions it may be worth a queen!
Suppose you gave someone odds that at any point in the game, they get an extra tempo; they could insert one extra move. How much would that handicap be worth? At least a queen? In many positions one could just use a knight or bishop, attack the queen, and then capture it with the extra tempo. So, in those cases the extra tempo is worth at least a queen minus a minor piece, if not more.
Compare that with giving White an extra tempo but only on the first move, when the pieces are not in conflict. Then White could start the handicapped game with both moves 1.e4 and 2.d4. That is a nice advantage, but nothing like the handicap of taking the extra move at
any
point in the game.
The question of an early tempo’s value is an issue at the start of the game when one player, usually White, offers a gambit. The gambit is often in the form of offering a pawn in return for some gain in development/time. White often gets about two tempi and open lines and, in many, the engine evaluates that as about even. Normally White is ahead around 0.3 pawns, so even is not quite enough compensation, hence the approximate one-third pawn value of a tempo at the start.
In the Morra Gambit Accepted
1.e4 c5 2.d4 cxd4 3.c3 dxc3 4.Nxc3
...
Black to play after 4.
N
xc3
...White has about two tempi for the pawn with some open lines. The engine evaluates this as about -0.2 in Black’s favor, instead of White’s normal +0.3.
Now let’s take the other extreme, an example which also is an excellent demonstration of the difference between static and dynamic evaluation:
Flip a coin to determine whose move it is
When I ask students who is winning this position, they all reasonably answer either “The side whose move it is” or “Whose move is it?”
In response, I reply, “We don’t know. We are going to flip a fair coin to determine whose move it is.” Then students correctly conclude that the chances are even; we could bet equally on either side as the odds are 50-50.
Therefore,
statically
the chances are the same, but
dynamically
one side or the other must be winning – a little like Schrödinger’s Cat; it is either alive or dead, but we don’t know which.
In the previous example, whoever had the move was winning. The opposite case, where whoever has the move is losing (i.e. in a sense that tempo is worth absolute negative value), occurs in a mutual zugzwang position like the Trebuchet:
Trebuchet: the tempo has absolute negative value – whoever is to play loses
We have shown cases where having the move loses and having the wins. Obviously we could also show many dead drawn endgame positions where it doesn’t matter whose move it is; the tempo has no positive or negative value, such as this one with bishops of the opposite color:
Either side to move: draw
No matter who is to move, any safe move draws easily. In this case, unlike the others, the tempo has no value.
Tip 121
A piece is usually worth more than three pawns except in the endgame.
One way to test this is to offer the following challenge: from the starting position, let Black take off whatever three white pawns he/she feels is most advantageous to him/her, but he/she should remove the knight or bishop he/she feels is the most advantageous (for Black) to give up. For example, suppose Black says White should remove his c-, f-, and g-pawns and he will remove his queen’s knight on b8.
A normal white advantage is (using
Stockfish
) about 0.2-0.3 pawns for White. If the three pawns are actually worth the queen’s knight and we have removed the pawns that help Black the most, White’s advantage should be 0.2 or less, but let’s run it for a minute and see...
White to play: evaluation?
At depth 33, White’s advantage is +1.21, about a pawn more than normal and on the verge of a forced win.
Why is the piece worth so much more than the three pawns at the start of a game?
• The ‘Reinfeld’ average value of a knight or bishop as three pawns (Tip #98) is a little conservative; it is fractionally higher.
• Early in the game, an extra piece has the entire game to help gang up with the other pieces on the superior piece side to win pawns.
• Pawns gain in power in the endgame when they can threaten to promote. In the opening they can control space, but an extra piece more than compensates for that, in most cases.
There are not too many ‘book’ openings where one side ‘sacrifices’ a piece for three pawns, and they usually only do so if they can get some other compensation, such as a lead in development, a massive center, better piece coordination, etc. It happens occasionally in the Sicilian (e.g. the Najdorf variation) when Black plays ...b7-b5 and White sacrifices on b5 and then wins the d6-pawn. Giving up the piece for three pawns is even more advantageous in lines such as
1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 a6 6.Bc4 e6 7.Bb3 Nbd7 8.0-0 Be7??
.
White to play after 8...
B
e7??
9.Bxe6!
A stock sacrifice. Taking with the knight is much weaker.
9...fxe6
This isn’t even best! Black’s position is so poor he should just concede the pawn with the meek 9...0-0.
10.Nxe6 Qb6 11.Nxg7+ Kf7 12.Nf5
Black has the extra piece for the three pawns, but the kingside is wrecked and the king will have nowhere to hide for the middlegame. With perfect play, White is already winning.
Here is a piece for three pawns line from the French Defense:
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.e5 Nfd7 5.f4 c5 6.Nf3 Nc6 7.Be3 Qb6 8.Na4 Qa5+ 9.c3 cxd4?!
(probably better is 9...b6 with some advantage to White)
10.b4! Nxb4 11.cxb4 Bxb4+ 12.Bd2 Bxd2+ 13.Nxd2
.
Black to play after 13.
N
xd2
Black has three pawns for the piece, but White’s advantage is about a full pawn, much more than a normal opening plus.
In summary, a random three pawns are rarely as good as an extra piece early in the game; in the deep endgame it could be quite the other way around, as promotion tactics become predominant. It is rarely true that an interesting trade balance is
always
good for one side or the other – the evaluation is position dependent. In this case the side with the three pawns can have the advantage when supported with additional compensation, but that is more the exception than the rule. In general, if it is not an endgame, take the extra piece!
Tip 122
Knights often have two primary ideas: to support squares (tactics, control, etc) from their current position, or to move toward favorable destination square(s) through a feasible path. That is why I call knights ‘path pieces’ because, unlike the fast pieces which can zoom through squares, knights need a viable path to get places.
‘You can’t get there from here’ is often a humorous idea involving travel or destination planning, but it is no joke when it applies to knight maneuvers. Sometimes it is possible for a knight to get from its current position to a more desirable one, and sometimes it is not, for various reasons. The path may literally be blocked, possibly by pawns, or it may take so long to get there that the purpose of going to the square would then be lost.
IM Silman once wrote that for a plan to be strong enough that you might want to execute it, it should meet two criteria: it has to be both feasible and effective (Tip #113). This would also apply to knight maneuvers: is it possible for a knight to get somewhere and, if so, would it be worth the tempi it takes for that to happen? Let’s consider the Botvinnik System in the English,
1.c4 c5 2.g3 g6 3.Bg2 Bg7 4.Nc3 Nc6 5.e4 d6 6.N1e2 Nf6 7.0-0 0-0 8.d3
:
Black to play
If Black plays 8...Nd4, then simply 9.Nxd4 cxd4 10.Nd5 and White is fine, as the weak d4-square can no longer be occupied by black pieces. So sometimes Black tries to get a second knight to cover d4! How to do this? If White falls asleep it will be ...Nf6-e8-c7-e6-d4! How can White counter? If immediately 8...Ne8 then White plays 9.Be3 and d3-d4. Therefore, that Black maneuver is only somewhat feasible since White can interfere by getting in a timely d3-d4. If not, it can be effective!
If you cannot see these knight maneuvers easily, you might try a knight ‘maze’. In the following position, keep moving the knight (to empty squares, of course!) until it captures the king:
Move only the knight to capture the king
The solution is: N
f3-g1-h3-f2-h1-g3-h5-f6-h7-f8-g6-h8-f7-d8-b7-c5-a6-b4-a2-c3-b1-a3-c4-xe3!
Or you can Google ‘chess knight mazes’ and find some different types of mazes online to improve your ‘knight vision’.
Tip 123
Except in some deep endgame positions, two minor pieces are almost always worth more than a rook and a pawn
.
This is a special case within Tip #98, which stated that the average values of the pieces are not exactly 1-3-3-5-9.
I once read that Michael Tal had said that he sometimes spent time looking for positions where ‘sacrificing; two pieces for a rook and a pawn was good. Why? Because it was so well known among strong players that two pieces were better than a rook and a pawn, that his opponent would almost always dismiss that possibility and let him give up the two pieces for the rook and pawn on the rare cases when that trade was favorable for the rook and pawn!
I like to show beginners the sequence
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Bc5 4.0-0 Nf6 5.Ng5? 0-0 6.Nxf7? Rxf7 7.Bxf7+ Kxf7
...
White to play after 7...
K
xf7
... and ask the questions “How would you evaluate this position?” and “Which king is safer?”
Not surprisingly, many students think White is better since, in their estimation – using Reinfeld integer values – the material is ‘even’ and, to them, White’s king is clearly safer.
Neither of these is correct; the engine evaluates Black’s position as winning(!) by about 3.2 pawns because Black has a knight and bishop for the rook and pawn (not equal!), the bishop-pair (see the next Tip #124), a lead in development, plus Black’s (!) king is much safer, since Black’s piece activity makes it much easier for him to harass White’s king in the middlegame.
Another experiment I do to illustrate the relative value of a rook and pawn versus two piece trade is to ask a student to evaluate a starting position where they could play White, but they had to take off the knight and bishop they were most willing to lose, while removing the black rook and pawn they thought would help them (White) the most. One recent student picked removing White’s b1-knight plus c1-bishop, and Black’s h8-rook and f7-pawn:
White to play after removing two pieces vs rook and pawn
This student guessed that instead of White’s normal (roughly) 0.3 pawn advantage, due to removing the ‘equal value’ but most advantageous-for-White pieces, that White might now be ahead much more, maybe about 2-3 pawns.
He was completely surprised when the engine evaluated this position in favor of Black by about -1.3! That is enough of advantage to be on the borderline of ‘forced win for Black if both sides play perfectly’, I think seeing just some of these engine evaluations of this imbalance should be enough to convince almost any astute student that, in general, two pieces are usually worth quite a bit more than a rook and pawn.
The main exceptions occur in endgames where either:
• The extra pawn gives promotion possibilities.
• The rook has extra access to attack the opponent’s pawns quickly through open lines (an engine usually quickly sees the future win of material).
But these are more the exception; otherwise, the two pieces are usually superior.
Tip 124
The bishop-pair does not mean having two bishops; it is short for ‘the advantage of the bishop-pair’ which means one side has both bishops and the other does not.
When I ask new students if they know what ‘the bishop-pair’ means, almost everyone says yes, but when I ask their definition, most get it incorrect. The most common incorrect answers I receive are:
• “I have two bishops” (to this I respond “Yes, that’s what it means in English, but that’s not the meaning in chess”).
• “My two bishops are strong/active/well placed.”
Then I tell them ‘the bishop-pair’ is short for ‘the advantage of the two bishops’ and this usually gets them on the right track to the correct idea.
In his award-winning article ‘The Evaluation of Material Imbalances’, first published in the March 1999
Chess Life
, GM Larry Kaufman measured the average value of the bishop-pair as about a +0.5 pawns ‘bonus’ to the material balance.
My coach, Donald Byrne, used to emphasize to me how important the bishop-pair was. While its average value is ‘only’ 0.5 pawns, in some positions the bishop-pair may be sufficient all by itself to provide a winning advantage. I was reminded of this when I reviewed a recent classical time control game from the Norway tournament:
Dommaraju Gukesh – Hikaru Nakamura
Stavanger 2023
Tarrasch Defense
1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 c5 4.e3 Nf6 5.Nf3 Nc6 6.a3 dxc4 7.Bxc4 a6 8.0-0 b5 9.Bd3 Bb7 10.Re1 Qc7 11.Qe2 Rd8 12.Rd1 cxd4 13.exd4 Be7 14.a4 b4 15.Ne4 Nxe4 16.Bxe4 0-0 17.Be3 Na5 18.Rac1 Qb8 19.Bb1 Bd5 20.Ne5 Qb7 21.Bd3 Ra8 22.Bf4 f5
Black creates a weak e-pawn and a weakened e5-square, but he is trying to create some imbalance in the position. The scoring system for the event rewarded wins as worth somewhat more than twice a draw!
23.Nf3 Bd8 24.Re1 Nb3 25.Rc2 Bb6 26.Qe5 Rac8 27.Rxc8 Rxc8 28.Qe2 Ra8 29.Qe3 Qc6 30.Be5 Qd7 31.Ng5 Na5 32.h4 Nc6 33.Rc1
Black to play after 33.
R
c1
33...Nxe5
Grabbing the bishop-pair.
34.Qxe5 h6 35.Nh3 Rc8 36.Re1?
36.Rxc8+ Qxc8 37.Qe3 holds the balance.
36...a5 37.Bb5 Qc7 38.Qe3 Qd6 39.Bd3 Ba2!
The d-pawn now falls too.
40.Nf4 Bxd4 41.Qd2 Be5 42.Ng6 Bf6 43.Qe2 Qd4 44.Rd1 Bb3 45.Rd2 Rd8 46.h5 Qg4
Offering to trade queens when ahead, even if it messes the pawn structure (Tip #86). Greedy would be 46...Bc4? 47.Bxc4 Qxd2 48.Qxe6+ Kh7 49.Qxf5 with a winning attack.
47.Qe3 Bd4 48.Be2 Qe4 49.Qxe4 fxe4 50.Kf1 Bf6 51.Rxd8+ Bxd8
A winning endgame; the bishops can ‘do their thing’. If you are one of those that don’t know how to use the bishop-pair, study endgames like these.
52.Ne5 Bxa4 53.Bc4 Kf8 54.Bxe6 Bf6 55.Ng6+ Ke8 56.b3 Bb5+ 57.Ke1 Bc3+ 58.Kd1 Bd4 59.Bd5 Bxf2 60.Bxe4 Bd4 61.Bd5 Kd7 62.Nh4 Kd6 63.Bg8 Bd7 64.Bf7 Bf6 65.Nf3 Bc6 66.Bg6 Bd5
The one thing you must not do in positions like this would be to trade into a bishops of opposite colors endgame. So the principle ‘Make fair trades of pieces, not necessarily pawns when ahead’ would
no
apply here. 66...Bxf3?? would be a monstrous beginner mistake.
67.Kc2 Bc3 68.Bf5 Ke7 69.Bg6 Kf6 70.Bd3 Bf7 71.g4 Be6
0-1
Even if you do not know how to best use the bishop-pair, in many positions its power is there! In general, you do not want to give your opponent the bishop-pair unless you get something substantial in return: a lead in development, a better pawn structure, an outpost knight, etc. If you play lower-rated players, they often give you the bishop-pair for no compensation, so it is almost like getting free material – look for that whenever you can.
Tip 125
Openings begin with closed lines and then often develop ‘fixed’ pawns. A common part of strategy is identifying possible pawn breaks which could potentially open lines to increase piece activity (or other benefits), and determining which breaks are most feasible, and how/when they can best be achieved.
A pawn break is often called a ‘break move’. This is a pawn move that attacks an opposing pawn that cannot easily/legally/safely just move past the attacking pawn. For example, after 1.e4 e5, the e-pawns become fixed and White’s break moves are d2-d4 and f2-f4; similarly, Black’s break moves are ...d7-d5 and ...f7-f5.
Similarly, in the Open Sicilian after 1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 (or 2...e6 or 2...Nc6) 3.d4 is a break move because although 3...c4 is legal, it is not safe due to 4.Bxc4.
Break moves are used to open lines for pieces since the attacked pawn cannot easily move, so the attacking pawn will have the future option of capturing and opening lines, assuming the attacked pawn does not already capture and already open lines. When break move opportunities occur, it makes sense to try to coordinate piece development and activity with the achievement of beneficial break moves.
For example, if the game opens with a Symmetric English 1.c4 c5, White can try to engineer an eventual d2-d4 with moves like 2.Nf3 or maybe an eventual e2-e3, since the immediate 2.d4 can be met by 2...cxd4 3.Qxd4 Nc6 (AWL; see tip 56), winning a tempo. Alternatively, White could prepare his other break move, b2-b4, with preparatory moves like Rb1 and/or a2-a3.
I often say: “Break moves are the only non-beginner strategy that needs to be taught to (near-) beginners once they learn basic safety and activity principles.” The reason is that break moves are so important that it is very difficult to play a reasonable opening sequence without using them. Players who either don’t know about break moves, or use them poorly or not at all, often complain to me “I keep getting cramped positions out of the opening!”
There is a type of break move error I frequently see in lower-rated players’ games. Since almost everyone understands that after 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 that the defending knight move 2...Nc6 is a reasonable (and, in fact best and most common) move,
they ‘naturally’ feel the mirror image idea of 1.d4 d5 2.Nf3 should be met by 2...Nc6(?).
White to move after 2...
N
c6
While not an outright mistake, 2...Nc6, at least when played by low-rated players, is misguided because it violates the principle ‘Do not develop your pieces where they unnecessarily block your most likely and/or effective break moves’.
In 1.d4 d5 openings, White’s break moves are e2-e4 and c2-c4. Black’s break moves are ...c7-c5 and ...e7-e5. But breaking with the e-pawns is more problematic; it is easier to make the break moves with the c-pawns safely, plus it introduces the other beneficial possibility of trading a ‘side’ pawn for a central pawn. It is not a coincidence that White’s most popular second move is the Queen’s Gambit, 2.c4. However, after White’s second most popular move 2.Nf3, which doesn’t block a break move, the ‘natural’ response 2...Nc6 does block Black’s most effective break pawn.
Similarly in the French Defense, the sequence 1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 Nc6(?) blocking the natural break ...c7-c5 is usually only played by beginners or strong players playing a very rare strategy (though rarely the latter). The reason is that 3...Nc6 so blatantly violates the ‘don’t block break moves’ principle that only someone who knows almost nothing or is so strong they can blatantly ignore principles would make this move!
When I review games with students who block important break moves, I often interject “Let me guess, you had problems later in this game because you got a cramped position?” and the most common reply I get is “I did! How did you know?”
Importantly, effective break moves do not just occur in the opening; they can occur in the middlegame and endgame. Therefore, just understanding this one (almost) basic strategy can greatly improve both your understanding of strategic play and help alleviate that ‘I didn’t know what to do’ feeling.
Tip 126
In closed positions (those without open or semi-open files), pieces are often better placed behind the pawns, not in front.
This principle, like all principles (which are not rules), has exceptions, but I often see amateur players get into trouble by putting too many pieces in front of their pawns in closed positions only to see opponent’s pawns push those pieces all over the board. I had an amusing game as White several years ago that illustrated this point. I could not quickly locate it, but it went something very similar to:
1.c4 c5 2.g3 g6 3.Bg2 Bg7 4.Nc3 Nc6 5.e4 d6 6.Nge2 Nf6 7.0-0 0-0 8.d3 Bd7 9.a3 Rb8 10.Rb1 a6 11.b4 Qc8 12.b5 Ne5?? 13.f4 Neg4 14.h3 Nh6 15.g4
Black to play after 15.g4
Here I am winning a piece due to the dual threat of 16.g5 with a fork and also trapping the knight on h6. If 15...Ne8 16.g5 anyway. So in this position my opponent sacrificed on g4, possibly
15...Nhxg4 16.hxg4 Bxg4
, but I won easily.
Notice in this game Black only put two pieces – his knights – in front of his pawns, but I had none. Moreover, it is the only game I can remember where I moved all eight pawns so early in the game!
Next let’s consider the main line in the King’s Indian Defense:
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Be2 0-0 6.Nf3 e5 7.0-0 Nc6 8.d5 Ne7
.
White to play after 8...
N
e7
Not only is the position closed (no open or semi-open files), but the center is fixed, or locked, as the d- and e-pawns are blocked up against each other. Both sides have only their king’s knight in front of their pawns, but one of the main lines now runs
9.Ne1 Nd7
, so that now all 16 non-pawns are behind pawns! This creates somewhat the opposite effect of the previous example, where Black’s knights were in front of his pawns and were being harassed by the white pawns.
Finally, the famous miniature Borochow-Fine, Pasadena 1932:
1.e4 Nf6 2.e5 Nd5 3.c4 Nb6 4.d4 Nc6?? 5.d5! Nxe5 6.c5 Nbc4 7.Qd4
when one of the harassed knights is lost.
Position after 7.
Q
d4
Tip 127
If one side is weak on a certain square complex (e.g. weak dark squares on the kingside), and the other side has that color bishop and the side with the weak squares does not, and queens are on the board, that is usually worth at least an extra pawn in evaluation for the side with that color bishop.
This tip is a ‘Dan’ specialty. A good example is a line in the Kan Sicilian where Black plays ...Be7-b4 and then ...Bb4xc3 to double White’s pawns on the semi-open c-file. In this example, White can even offer an extra pawn!
1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 a6 5.Nc3 Qc7 6.Be2 Bb4 7.0-0 Bxc3+?
This is not a good move, but I have seen many lower-rated players play moves like this in analogous situations.
8.bxc3
Black to play after 8.bxc3
All the conditions here are met:
• Black is weak on the central and queenside dark squares.
• White has a dark-squared bishop and Black does not.
• Queens are still on the board.
Although Black can now win a pawn with 8...Qxc3 (not one of Black’s three best moves), no matter what Black plays, Black is already lost! If you do not believe me, set up this position with your friendly local high-level engine (or a grandmaster if you have one available), and try to defend Black’s position.
The combination of Black’s weakness on the dark squares and the power of White’s bishop-pair (especially his unopposed dark-squared bishop) can very quickly create unstoppable threats. Just for the fun of it, I will let
Stockfish
play itself in this position (I will give it maybe 20-30 seconds per move). Here is the result:
8...Nf6 9.Ba3 Qxc3 10.Nb3 b5 11.e5 b4 12.exf6 bxa3 13.fxg7 Rg8 14.Bf3 Nc6 15.Re1 Ra7 16.Bxc6 dxc6 17.Qh5 Qxg7 18.g3 h6 19.h4 Re7 20.Rab1 Qg4 21.Qxh6 Rd7 22.Nc5 Rd4 23.Qe3 Qxh4 24.Rb8 Kd8 25.Nb7+ Kd7 26.Nc5+ Kd8 27.Nd3 c5 28.Nxc5 Qg4 29.Qc3 Rd1 30.Nxe6+ Ke7 31.Nf4+ Kd7 32.Rb4 Rxe1+ 33.Qxe1 Rg5 34.Qd2+ Ke7 35.Re4+ Kf8 36.Qd4 Rg8 37.Qc5+ Kg7 38.Nh5+ 1-0
To paraphrase what Fischer once wrote: Of course, Black can play can play differently, but then Black would lose differently!
Another example is Radjabov-Bortnyk, World Rapid Championship, Doha 2016:
White to play
White could save his attacked rook on c1, but instead he offered an exchange sacrifice with
11.d5!
. After
11...Bxc1
(not best, but White is doing very well either way)
12.Qxc1
White has the bishop-pair, the only dark-squared bishop, and weak dark squares around the black king. With the queens on the board, the principle is fully satisfied.
Despite being down the exchange, the engine rates White’s position as +3! Play continued:
12...Nd4 13.g4 Bd7 14.Qh6 Nxf3+ 15.Bxf3 Ne8 16.Ne4 f6 17.h4 Bxg4 18.h5 gxh5 19.Ng5 fxg5?
Only 19...Rf7 gives Black a chance.
20.Qxg5+ Kf7 21.Qxh5+!! Bxh5 22.Bxh5+ Kg8 23.Rg1+ Ng7 24.Rxg7+ Kh8 25.Rxe7+ Rf6 26.Bxf6+ Kg8 27.Rg7+ Kf8 28.Rxh7 Qf5 29.Rh8# 1-0
For a full annotation of this instructive game, I suggest Cyrus Lakdawala’s recent work
Irrational Chess
.
There is a well-known line in the Grünfeld where White sacrifices the exchange to get rid of Black’s kingside fianchettoed bishop; it is called the Sokolsky Attack:
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5 4.cxd5 Nxd5 5.e4 Nxc3 6.bxc3 Bg7 7.Bc4 0-0 8.Ne2 c5 9.0-0 Nc6 10.Be3 Bg4 11.f3 Na5 12.Bd3 cxd4 13.cxd4 Be6 14.d5!?
.
Position after 14.d5!?
On the popular chess website Lichess, someone let this position run for 52 ply (those long ‘think’ results gets saved to the Cloud) and 14.d5 was calculated as the equally best move for White (along with 14.Rc1 and 14.Bf2) and all three moves were evaluated as 0.00! After
14...Bxa1
(best)
15.Qxa1 f6
the chances are still evaluated as equal, despite Black’s material advantage.
So, once again, we see that getting your opponent’s dark-squared bishop while retaining yours while meeting all the other conditions of this tip were worth at least the entire pawn – but in this ‘book line’ not nearly as much more as in the previous examples.
Tip 128
Chess is not checkers: you do not have to capture, and putting all your pawns on the same color to guard each other is often a bad idea.
Consider the sequence
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 exd4 4.Nxd4
...
Black to play after 4.
N
xd4
...and then
4...Nxd4(?) 5.Qxd4.
In the Lichess master database, 4...Nxd4(?) was played in 0.6% of the games, probably mostly when an inferior player was playing Black. In their ‘everyone’ database 4...Nxd4(?) was played 32% of the games, more than any other move! The engine does not rate 4...Nxd4(?) among its top five moves!
So why is the inferior 4...Nxd4 so popular with amateurs? They believe either/or:
• It prematurely lures the queen to the center, causing White to violate ‘Don’t bring your queen out too early’.
• That once a capturing sequence is started, it pretty much commits them to all the ‘safe’ captures on that square.
But chess is not checkers, where captures are mandatory. You should only make a capture if you think it is the best (or equally best) move, not because it is possible, legal, or continues a previous capturing sequence.
The other ‘checker problem’ that is commonly seen with amateurs is to set up a pawn chain where as many pawns as possible guard other pawns, by putting all the pawns on the same color squares, e.g.
1.d4 d5 2.e3 c5 3.f4 Nf6 4.c3 e6 5.g3(?)
5...Be7 6.a3(?)
.
Black to play after 6.a3(?)
Stockfish
rates Black’s position as better by about one pawn, already on the borderline of possibly winning.
Why are beginners and near-beginners attracted to similar pawn structures? They feel they are safe, with maximum pawn coverage of adjacent pawns, and seemingly setting up a ‘rock solid’ pawn wedge.
Of course, as these players improve, they experience the pain of being punished repeatedly for creating such clearly weak square complexes. In the example above, White is massively weak on the light squares, which can be occupied by enemy forces. But for an amateur used to checkers (and many who are not!), where only the 32 squares of one color can be occupied, the pawns instead seem to form a fortress. Once their ‘board vision’ gets more experienced with the chess board, where all 64 squares should be utilized, such ‘ugly’ pawn structures now are not only not formidable, but can actually be seen as the opposite, i.e. as weak.
Tip 129
More pawns in the middle are good.
We have already seen in Tip #126 that pieces generally belong behind pawns in closed positions. For analogous reasons – pieces generally lose fights to pawns in battles over square control – it is usually true that more pawns toward the center are good, especially before the endgame. Because this is such a common and powerful idea, I am surprised this tip does not have a wider audience.
There is a well-known principle that says ‘When two pawns can capture, generally capture toward the middle.’ This is especially true when the captures can be made on the knight files (b- and g-files), so that the centrally capturing pawn converts a rook’s pawn into a knight’s pawn, so that now it is attacking two squares instead of one. Consider
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Bc5 4.d3 Nf6 5.Be3 Bb6 6.Bxb6
:
Black to play after 6.
B
xb6
The engine rates the ‘natural’
6...axb6
as about half a pawn better than the ugly 6...cxb6.
But our tip takes this idea one step further. It says that even if other pieces can capture instead of a pawn, if you can get another pawn toward the center, that is often correct. Let’s examine the famous ‘Every Russian Schoolboy Knows’ recapture for Black in many variations of the main line King’s Indian Defense, e.g.
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Be2 0-0 6.Nf3 e5 7.0-0 Nc6 8.d5 Ne7 9.Nd2
(9.Ne1 is currently the engine’s choice)
9...Ne8 10.f3 f5
and now 11.b4 is the preferred move, but what if White plays
11.exf5
:
Black to play after 11.exf5
Black has four ways to recapture and we can see the appeal of capturing with a piece:
• 11...Bxf5 develops a formerly undeveloped piece.
• 11...Rxf5 keeps the rook unblocked on a semi-open file.
• 11...Nxf5 activates the knight with the winning fork threat of 12...Ne3.
• But, as ‘every Russian schoolboy knows’, the engine rates the ‘more pawns in the center are good’
11...gxf5
as better than all of them by at least one full pawn!
This is a surprising result to many. Once, when I was a young man who had just won the prestigious Greater Philadelphia Invitational Championship, I was teaching this idea to a class of night school adults. One of the adults told me I was wrong: Black’s king was getting too exposed, and Black was sure to get checkmated. At the time there were no engines to back up my claim. But then – and now – we know Black’s immediate and strong control of the center after
11...gxf5
makes that the best move.
This evaluation is also consistent with Tip #118 about immediate benefits often outweighing nebulous long-term possibilities. In this case, the nebulous possibility is Black’s king being in danger. Instead, Black’s king is surrounded by black pieces and the central control granted by his pawns also further indicates that with proper play, the white king is likely in more danger than the black one!
Tip 130
The ‘Pointing Rule’ is a helpful but often misunderstood principle indicating the direction of break moves and possible attack.
When I ask new students if they know the pointing rule and they answer “Yes!” and I ask them to tell it to me, they usually say something like: “Attack the way your pawns are pointing” or “Your pawns point to the side of the board you want to play.”
While they are on the right track, following the ‘rule’ the way they state it can often lead to both confusion or outright misdirection. I think the best wording to indicate the right idea for the Pointing Rule is:
When all four d- and e-pawns are locked up against each other so none can move, place your hand across your d- and e-pawns and the direction your hand points is the side you want to attack, and the side you almost always want to look for a break move (usually with the c- or f-pawns).
Good examples are the Advance French and the main line of the King’s Indian Defense. The French structure is seen after
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.e5
:
Black to play after 3.e5
All four d- and e-pawns are locked against each other; the white pawns point to the kingside with a possible f2-f4-f5 pawn break (Tip #125), and the black pawns point to the queenside and 3...c5 is the indicated immediate pawn break.
The King’s Indian Defense main line is
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Be2 0-0 6.Nf3 e5 7.0-0 Nc6 8.d5 Ne7
:
White to play after 8...
N
e7
All four d- and e-pawns are again locked against each other; the white pawns point to the queenside with a possible c4-c5 pawn break and the black pawns point to the kingside with an eventual ...f7-f5 pawn break.
The pointing rule only works well with the d- and e-pawns and only when they are locked. For example, if the central pawns were on d3 and e4 for White, and the black pawns on d5 and e6, as often happens in the Queen’s Gambit Declined or London...
Don’t apply the ‘Pointing Rule’ here!
...here both sets of pawns would point to the queenside, indicating both could have the advantage to attack there! That does not make a lot of sense.
The further away the pawns are from the center the less it works, too:
Don’t apply the ‘Pointing Rule’ here either!
If you tried to apply a Pointing Rule here, it would indicate Black should attack in the center and White should attack on the a-file. That might make some sense for Black, but it would make no sense at all for White!
In summary, the Pointing Rule should primarily apply only for four locked, central d- and e-pawns. If you try to apply this principle in other situations, it may or may not indicate a correct plan of action. If the ‘way your pawns point’ in other situations makes sense, then it is acceptable to follow your instincts, but don’t
blindly
apply this rule to situations other than those properly indicated with locked d- and e-pawns.
Tip 131
In the opening or early middlegame, if you can capture a center (d- or e-) pawn with a side pawn (c- or f-pawn), and the recapture cannot be with a pawn, it is almost always correct to do so.
It is important to add:
• If the recapture can be made with a pawn, this principle does not apply: sometimes the initial capture of the central pawn is still very good, and sometimes not so good. The principle does not imply that if the recapture can be made with a pawn that the initial capture of the central pawn is not indicated.
• After the early middlegame, positional factors like the one in this principle start to yield to tactical and endgame pawn structure considerations, so it is less likely (but not impossible) to be applied.
For our first example, consider the Queen’s Gambit,
1.d4 d5 2.c4
:
Black to play
White is threatening 3.cxd5 Qxd5 4.Nc3, winning a tempo, so Black’s main replies are
2...e6
(Queen’s Gambit Declined), 2...c6 (Slav Defense), and 2...dxc4 (Queen’s Gambit Accepted). If Black makes any other move, such as the inferior Marshall Defense (2...Nf6?!) then this principle applies and 3.cxd5 is, in almost all cases, the right move.
Let’s consider the Open Sicilian,
1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6
(or 2...Nc6 or 2...e6)
3.d4
:
Black to play
White ‘threatens’ 4.dxc5 dxc5 5.Qxd8+, but that’s somewhat irrelevant since one of the ideas of the Sicilian is to offer the trade of the c-pawn for the white d-pawn. Moreover, 3.d4 is a pawn break because Black cannot safely play 3...c4. So Black almost always follows the principle and plays
3...cxd4
.
Likewise, in the Advance French,
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 c5
...
White to play after 3...c5
... if White plays any move other than the normal 4.c3 or the strange 4.dxc5 (also allowing Black to trade a side pawn for a center pawn), Black should follow the principle and play 4...cxd4, making White recapture on d4 with a piece. Of course, if White does play the normal 4.c3, then 4...cxd4 is
not
indicated by the principle. Instead, Black should develop with 4...Nc6, 4...Qb6 or 4...Bd7.
Tip 132
It is usually better if your weak pawns are on the defending (minority) side of the board. Weak pawns are often not that much of a detriment in defending versus a majority than they are when they on the offensive side, crippling a majority.
Consider just the pawn structure in the following variation of the Exchange Ruy Lopez,
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Bxc6 dxc6 5.d4 exd4 6.Qxd4
:
Diagram 1: Exchange Ruy Lopez pawn structure
Now compare this with the pawn structure if we shift Black’s doubled pawn from c6 to f6.
Is the theoretical harm of the doubled pawns for Black about equal in each diagram, or is one structure more helpful than the other? On the surface, this may seem like a silly question, but it illustrates a very helpful bit of chess knowledge.
Diagram 2: doubled pawn shifted from c6 to f6
The answer is that the first diagram is better for White than the second (and thus the first diagram is worse for Black). Why? Because in the first diagram, White has a healthy kingside majority that, with proper play, can create a passed pawn in the endgame (if I recall correctly, engines have proven that if Diagram 1 was a king and pawn endgame, it is a win for White). Moreover, in that same Diagram 1, Black’s queenside majority is crippled by the passed pawn and Black cannot forcibly create a passed pawn, which is why White can win the endgame.
But in the second diagram neither side has a pawn majority on either side of the board. Black’s doubled pawns are not as much of a detriment, as White cannot use his slight advantage in the pawn structure to potentially create a passed pawn.
Diagram 3
In our final example Black has weak pawns on both sides of the board. But his queenside problems are more detrimental; Black has a majority, but it is badly crippled and the extra pawn is only a minor benefit; without help those pawns cannot create a passed pawn. On the other hand, the black doubled pawns on the kingside may be vulnerable, but if only pawn play is allowed, those doubled isolated g-pawns can prevent the two white pawns from creating a passed pawn.
Understanding when weak pawns and crippled majorities can or cannot create passed pawns or, conversely, prevent or not prevent the creation of passed pawns, is a big step toward understanding endgame possibilities.
Tip 133
Doubled pawns are not always bad.
I remember a student game where my student made some important decisions, primarily based on his feeling the necessity to avoid doubled pawns. But to worry about doubled pawns when there was also the possibility he might lose a rook in a relatively straightforward position was getting his ‘chess perspective’ quite backwards.
In the road to chess improvement, one must be able to consistently make the big safety decisions correctly before spending time worrying about the smaller ones.
Strategy is usually the tiebreak of equally safe moves
. My math analogy would be worrying about something in geometry before you know the next integer after 15 when counting to 20. I see this problem in lessons quite frequently, and it often comes from inexperienced players reading advanced grandmaster analysis and arriving at the conclusion that they, too, need to implement those fine positional details if they are to improve. Better to work on the big issues like safety/tactics, playing consistently slowly in long time control games, and using all your pieces all the time (activity) – see Tip #1.
With that in mind I use as illustration the beginning of the following game, which was played several years ago. White was a friend of mine rated 1500, who liked to play in the U2200 section of tournaments. In this game, which I think can be considered as a ‘poster game for positions where doubled pawns aren’t always bad’, he was paired with an Expert, who had Black.
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Bc5 4.Nc3 Nf6 5.d3 d6 6.0-0 Be6 7.Bxe6 fxe6 8.Qe2 0-0 9.Be3 Bb6 10.Bxb6 axb6 11.Rfe1 Qe8 12.Rad1 Qg6 13.a3 Rf7 14.Kh1 Raf8 15.Rd2 Nh5
White to play after 15...
N
h5
Around this point I walked away. When I returned a little later, I found the game was over, so I approached my friend. Our conversation went something like this:
Me: “How did you do?”
1500 Friend: “I got crushed.”
Me: “Yes, I saw – things didn’t look too good when I left.”
1500 Friend: “But you know what was funny?”
Me: “No, what?”
1500 Friend: “I did everything right and he did everything wrong!”
Me: “Really? Do you mean his two sets of doubled pawns?”
1500 Friend: “Yes!”
Me: “You really think that those doubled pawns were bad for him and good for you?”
1500 Friend: “Of course!”
Me: “Maybe I should get you to read my book
Elements of Positional Evaluation
where I discuss when doubled pawns can be harmful and helpful!”
In this game the expert understood that the capture 7...fxe6 gave him the only semi-open file on the kingside, providing important mobility/activity gains for his rooks, while simultaneously giving him an extra pawn in the center to guard the important d5-square. Moreover, his doubled pawns on the b-file were also not harmful, as that gave him the second semi-open file and moved his a-pawn on to the more influential b-file. That leads to a *Tip Alert!*
If one side has the only semi-open file on the board for his rooks and the other side has no open or semi-open files, that can in many circumstances be a big advantage for the side possessing the only semi-open file
.
I think the first book I read where it emphasized that doubled pawns are not always harmful was
Point Count Chess
by Horowitz and Mott-Smith. This book has been criticized for its point count system as being over-simplified, which may be so, but I thought their section on when to count doubled pawns as harmful was incisive, eye-opening, and very instructive.
Chapter Six
Openings
The tips in this chapter, not surprisingly, deal with the opening stage of the game. This includes not only tips to make good moves during the initial part of the game, but how to choose openings, and choosing/playing specific openings and opening structures. There is even a tip about how to best manage your time during the opening phase.
Tip 134
Learning openings and the two extremes of either: (i.) not studying anything about openings, or (ii.) locking yourself in a closet trying to memorize entire openings... are both clearly incorrect. Moderation, as usual, is optimal.
Therefore, the following are four ‘moderate’ things you can do to efficiently study openings:
• Learn first just the main lines (‘tabiyas’) of the openings you intend to play, starting with one for White, one with Black versus 1.e4, and one with Black versus 1.d4.
• After each game, review the game and ask ‘If I had to play this game again, on which move would I improve?’ You can use any media such as a database, book, engine, video, etc. This will both extend your tabiya knowledge further (to extra moves), and widen it when opponents vary from the first tabiya moves you learned.
• Learn the basic traps in your openings, not just to spring them on your opponents, but also to avoid falling into them yourself.
• Play many speed games with your opening before using it in more serious games, again reviewing your openings after each set of speed games.
I have been quoted on social media that I think studying openings is not important. I have never written that and it is clearly not true. Sometimes I do write: “One argument that the opening is the most important phase of the game is that it’s the only phase you are guaranteed to play each and every game!” Of course, that is a little tongue-in-cheek, as I make arguments about each phase possibly being the most important.
Moreover, the tools today to help players learn the openings are far superior to those I had. Like Beth Harmon in
The Queen’s Gambit
, I learned many of my openings in the 1960s and, whereas Beth perused
Modern Chess Openings
#9
, I had the latter 60s benefit of
MCO-10
. In those pre-Batsford years, there were basically no books in English on specific openings, so I had to purchase the German Schwarcz series (I didn’t know German...).
But today players have databases, books, videos, engines, and specific opening tools like ChessBase, Chess Openings Wizard, and many more. You want to follow the important advice (*Tip Alert!*):
After each game, fast or slow, look up your opening in a database, book, video, and/or engine and determine ‘If I had to play this opening again and my opponent make the same moves, on which move would I improve, what move would I play instead, and how can I remember this?
’
If you are reviewing the game and cannot find what move to play in a database or book, the engine’s recommendation is now so accurate that you can be pretty sure its top move is a good one.
I religiously looked up my games in
MCO-10
(or anywhere), not because I wanted to be a better player (that was a goal!), but because I felt it would be embarrassing and unbecoming of an intelligent person to make an opening mistake and then not try to learn from it when there was a ready resource that would help correct mistakes. Players who do not look up their openings after a game are likely to either repeat the same mistakes forever or make a misguided attempt to do it themselves, which is a hit-or-miss proposition, whereas engine or grandmaster corrections are conveniently available.
Moreover, today it is easier than ever to look up speed game openings because much of speed play is done online, and the same servers that have the openings databases preserve all your games, fast or slow, for later analysis.
Yes, emphasis on opening study (especially memorization) is not
as
important, especially for lower-rated players, as many amateurs make it out to be. But it is still important! Memorizing is all right, but understanding is better, and learning and applying principles to apply when you are ‘out of book’ is almost essential.
Tip 135
Grandmaster Andrew Soltis suggests that in many cases it might be more beneficial for class players to play openings that are not the most popular ones at the super-grandmaster level.
In his book
Grandmaster Secrets: Openings
, GM Andrew Soltis gives some reasons why class players might want to consider playing openings that are not the most popular among the top grandmasters. One obvious reason was that these were the openings that other amateurs were playing, so to also use those openings would be to play lines that the opponents would most likely know well.
Another reason to play less popular openings is that the reasons why grandmasters are less likely to play those openings does not necessarily hold at the lower levels. I believe he mentioned the Riga variation in the Ruy Lopez as an example. The Riga is not played because of the forcing line White has that was first illustrated by Capablanca:
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.0-0 Nxe4 6.d4 exd4?!
This is the Riga.
7.Re1 d5 8.Nxd4 Bd6! 9.Nxc6 Bxh2+ 10.Kh1
10.Kxh2 Qh4+ 11.Kg1 Qxf2+ is a draw.
10...Qh4 11.Rxe4+! dxe4 12.Qd8+ Qxd8 13.Nxd8+ Kxd8 14.Kxh2
Black to play after 14.
K
xh2
Black has a rook and two pawns for the two pieces, so an amateur using the ‘Reinfeld’ integer scale for piece value (1-3-3-5-9) would think that Black has ‘more material’. But grandmasters – and now engines – know better and White, with his bishop-pair, has all the winning chances. Therefore, once this line was known, it was avoided like the plague by all strong players with the black pieces. In fact, Soltis suggested that even if your opponent playing White might get this far, he not only might not have the technique that would give him a win, but he might evaluate the position as better for Black!
But what are the chances that an amateur level player would happen to know this rare line for White? Not good, you might surmise. Thanks to my student, radio personality Howard Stern, who took my advice and tried playing the Riga against other amateurs (and even amateur level practice engines), we have a good idea of the answer. Howard played this line for Black about 100 times and
not once
did anyone play the Capablanca ‘refutation’.
In other words, in about 100 amateur games, Black had at least an equal (or in many cases winning) position out of the opening in every game.
I think this experiment greatly backed up GM Soltis’s claim – which I had agreed with from the start (otherwise I would not have included this tip nor recommended it to Mr. Stern). Plus, although the Riga is an excellent example of Soltis’s suggestion, there are many more openings or lines that would benefit from a similar argument – that they are not popular for GMs, but OK for class players.
I sometimes hear students rated in the low 1000s say something like “I can’t play the King’s Indian Defense; didn’t Kasparov give it up because it was no good?”, or “The engines think it is good for White.”
In these instances, I try to explain to them what Soltis also had argued: what makes sense at the super-grandmaster level doesn’t always translate into what works or helps at the improving amateur level. Of course, there are some questionable opening lines that grandmasters avoid and amateurs should too, but things are not always so black and white (no pun intended).
There is much ‘grey’ room available for opening choice – just consider all the clever ways former world champion Magnus Carlsen uses in his openings to avoid the most popular lines, but still get his opponents to just ‘play chess’. Carlsen is often willing to give up his opening advantage with White and play discarded or ignored lines which do not promise White much, but take his opponent out of their engine ‘book’ analysis.
Amateur players do not need to worry as much about their opponent being armed with engine analysis 23 moves deep. This freedom gives them much greater leeway in choosing and playing opening lines that are fun and interesting, no matter their reputation among high-level international players.
Tip 136
A tip for helping you find a ‘good’ opening.
Sometimes I get asked, out of context, “What’s a good opening you recommend?”, “What’s a good opening for White?”, or “What a good opening against 1.e4?”. The problem is with the word ‘good’. If by good you mean the more winning chances, the better, then no legitimate opening is that good!
Assume there was an opening, the Yadeeda variation of the HumptyUmp opening, which won all the time for White. Then that opening sounds really good, doesn’t it? But if the Yadeeda variation wins all the time by force, then why would any good black player who likes to play the HumptyUmp opening go into the Yadeeda variation? He wouldn’t. So that line wins for White, but it is not such a ‘good’ opening since it amounts to an opening trap – no one of any knowledge would play it for Black.
Similarly, suppose a line leads to absolute equality (or better) for Black in every variation. Then no good player would likely play it for White (unless they really like that type of position or are playing for a draw), because White is supposed to try for an advantage, not play openings where Black easily equalizes (or better).
Therefore, all ‘good’ openings, at least those played regularly at the grandmaster level, have the same characteristics: if played correctly by both players, White is fighting for a slight advantage and Black is struggling for equality. If the evaluation of the opening is any less for White, then good players will not play it consistently as White, and any poorer evaluation for Black and good players won’t play that side consistently, either.
In that sense all ‘good’ openings theoretically yield a slightly advantage to White. However, if by ‘good’ you mean:
• Gives me good winning chances if my opponent plays it wrong.
• Is fun to play.
• Helps me learn something.
• Contains a lot of rich strategic and tactical possibilities.
Then you are talking!
As I noted in the previous tip, GM Soltis wrote in
Grandmaster Secrets: Openings
that it makes sense for the average player to at least sometimes try openings that are
not
popular at the grandmaster level, and I agree. However, many players erroneously tend to think that if a grandmaster doesn’t play an opening there’s something wrong with it.
For example, when former World Champion Garry Kasparov gave up the King’s Indian Defense, thousands of class players did too, as if their winning chances in that opening were gravely affected by Kasparov’s decision. Needless to say, I thought they were being just as illogical as they might have been to pick up the King’s Indian Defense again a couple of years later just because GM Teimour Radjabov starting having success with it at the top level. The value of the opening did not change from Kasparov to Radjabov; just some players secondary perception of its effectiveness.
There are lots of ‘good’ openings for intermediate players that grandmasters don’t play and, as computers, and former world champion Magnus Carlsen, have shown us, even some very rare openings are playable if handled correctly. My suggestion: pick out openings that are both fun to play and help you learn something (assuming you want to improve). Then, every once in a while, rotate to something completely different and learn how to play different pawn structures (Tip #140).
Finally, no opening is good if you keep making the same mistake over and over, so it is almost necessary to review each game, fast or slow, with an opening database (strong players, books, and engines are helpful, too). The goal is to find out what you would do differently next time if your opponent played the same moves against you.
Tip 137
Start your opening preparation by identifying the most common opening moves you are likely to encounter. Then find a ‘tabiya’ (standard opening sequence) that addresses those lines and learn them first.
The next Tip, #138 will deal with how to learn opening lines. This tip discusses what a tabiya is and how to find one.
Tabiya: An Arabic word originally meaning the opening set-up of pieces, but now more commonly used to mean the standard moves of any opening, i.e. “the real game starts after the players play the tabiya.” For example, we could say the tabiya for the Closed Ruy Lopez is 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.0-0 Be7 6.Re1 b5 7.Bb3 0-0. At this point White could allow the Marshall Attack with 8.c3 d5 or after 8.c3 Black could opt for the regular Closed lines with 8...d6 9.h3, or White could play an Anti-Marshall line with another 8th move such as 8.a4 or 8.d3 or 8.h3.
When you choose your opening repertoire, you should prepare tabiyas as the ‘trunks’ of your learning tree against all common replies. For example, suppose you decide to open 1.d4 and 2.c4
when playing White. You might then prepare a tabiya – a set of standard moves for each side – for
each
of the following common defenses (you can include more or fewer lines if you wish!):
• Queen’s Gambit Declined, 1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6.
• Queen’s Gambit Accepted, 1.d4 d5 2.c4 dxc4.
• Semi-Slav Defense, 1.d4 d5 2.c4 c6 3.Nf3 Nf6 4.Nc3 e6.
• King’s Indian Defense, 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7.
• Grünfeld Defense, 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5.
• Nimzo-Indian Defense, 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 Bb4 (or, if you prefer to play 3.Nf3, the Queen’s Indian, 3...b6, and Bogo-Indian, 3...Bb4+).
• Modern Benoni, 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 e6.
• Benko Gambit, 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 b5.
• Dutch Defense, 1.d4 f5.
As you expand your repertoire, you can add tabiyas to meet lesser played lines like the Albin Counter-Gambit, 1.d4 d5 2.c4 e5,
the Budapest Gambit, 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e5,
the Modern Defense, 1.d4 g6,
the Old Benoni, 1.d4 c5, or any other variations for which you think it wise to prepare.
How do you find these tabiyas? In the old days, players like myself or the fictional Beth Harmon would use a book like
Modern Chess Openings
. In the layout of that book, the longer lines that are ‘starter’ moves at the top of each page could often form a complete tabiya. Today there are even entire opening series which primarily offer explanations of tabiyas such as New in Chess’s
Comprehensive Chess Openings
or John Watson’s
Mastering the Chess Openings
.
How do you pick out a tabiya from among various lines you can play? There is not one answer to that. You can pick out the line that the database says gets the best results or one that is the most popular. I did not usually use either of those criteria; I picked out the variation that seemed like it led to the position(s) I found the most fun.
One of the common questions I get asked is: “How do I know when the tabiya has ended?” The most common answer is when the main lines branch out to multiple reasonable choices. However, this is an individual question that does not have a just this one black and white answer, but depends on other factors such as how proficient a player you are, what your opponents know and are playing, how much you can remember, or how the information is presented in the source material you are referencing.
In any case, you want to come to the board armed with a repertoire of possible tabiyas that can at least get you started if someone plays the most popular replies to your opening. This will represent the trunk of your tree and, as you get more experience with your lines and look up your openings after each game (Tip #134), your repertoire will both deepen and widen as you branch out from your tabiyas and fill in your opening knowledge ‘tree’.
Tip 138
When learning a sequence (opening, endgame etc), practice it repeatedly, best from both sides, with a friend/engine, to try to move it from short-term into long-term memory (i.e. ‘understand it better’).
In my experience, the stronger the student, the more likely they are to remember a taught sequence without too much repetition. This is not because stronger players have better memories in general (psychological experiments have shown this is not usually true), but because they are more familiar with the chess board and thus have better ‘board vision’.
What often happens when I show something to a lower-rated student is they see and understand when I am teaching, but if the same pattern/sequence occurs again in a future lesson, they frequently don’t recognize/remember it. One way they can improve their ‘memory’ is to practice repeating the pattern/sequence as soon as possible after the lesson, until they feel comfortable it is something they understand and can repeat.
When I was a beginning tournament player, I would pick out my ‘tabiyas’ (standard opening sequences) from
MCO-10
, and then play each out for both sides several times until I felt comfortable I could repeat it at a later time. Usually learning a sequence that well took about 20 minutes. For example, I learned the main line of the Closed Ruy Lopez:
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 5.0-0 Be7 6.Re1 b5 7.Bb3 d6
(7...0-0 has become more common, but then it signaled the ‘Marshall Attack’)
8.c3 0-0 9.h3
.
Black to play after 9.h3
Once I mastered this sequence, I was ready to extend it and/or branch out with earlier variations:
• Extend with Black variations, 9...Nb8 (Breyer), 9...Na5 (Classical), 9...Bb7 (Zaitsev), etc.
• Branch with earlier lines 5...Nxe4 (Open), 7...0-0 8.c3 d5 (Marshall Attack), etc.
If I had a study-buddy available (a friend who would help me study), I would play out the repetitions with him/her. My study buddy could have a book to aid them, if needed. After several repetitions we would switch sides. Today there are opening study software tools like Chess Openings Wizard, ChessBase, and tools within chess server websites which allow players to store their repertoires and practice them.
There is nothing unique about learning opening sequences in this manner; the subject could have been ‘In the endgame, how to draw in a king and pawn versus king position when the side with the king can’t get in front of the pawn.’ When learning these ideas, a comparable repetition of the sequence, preferably playing both sides, will aid both understanding and remembrance.
Tip 139
If you are an aspiring to improve player, it is helpful to rotate your openings periodically to learn more about different pawn structures. Also, it helps greatly when you must transpose out of your opening (or are tricked into it), or play versus irregular openings.
Some instructors suggest to their students that they stick to openings that fit their ‘style’. While that is often good advice for the short run, if you want to improve, you will run into more general situations that will help you in many openings if you play different pawn structures that arise from various openings.
There is also the benefit of avoiding boredom and exposing yourself to different types of games to better decide not only which ones you enjoy playing the most, but also to better expose your weaknesses so that you can become a better player.
As will be discussed further in Tip #140, learning various openings also helps when facing possible transpositions from one opening to another, or when facing irregular openings that require you to play your side like one type of position or another.
For example, if you have played the black side of the Queen’s Gambit Declined with 1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6,
you will probably be comfortable meeting the English Opening, 1.c4, with 1...e6 and 2...d5.
Or if you have enjoyed the Caro-Kann and you are trying to play the Slav against 1.d4 with 1...d5 (getting ready to answer 2.c4 with 2...c6), but White instead plays 2.e4, offering a Blackmar-Diemer Gambit, you can safely slide into the comfort of the Caro with 2...c6.
Let’s address some of the common questions about rotating openings. For the purpose of this discussion, we’ll assume your repertoire has three main parts: what you play as White, how you defend 1.d4, and how you defend 1.e4:
• How often should you rotate? This depends on many factors, such as how much fun/boring your current opening choice is, how many times you have played it (much more via lots of speed games accelerates learning, assuming you are looking up your opening after each game(s); Tip #134), what your success rate is, and how many different times you have previously rotated.
• Should you rotate all three parts of your opening at the same time? Not usually; it is too much work in a short period, although you could do two if they ‘pair’ (like adopting The Modern, 1...g6, against both 1.e4 and 1.d4)
• What openings should you choose? Refer to Tip #136, but in general ones that are fun/challenging to play, lead to positions where you can learn, and ones with pawn structures that you have not previously practiced.
Tip 140
If you have never tried the King’s Indian Defense or the French Defense, those openings are not only good for understanding fixed centers, but also plausible defense set-ups against many irregular openings too. Therefore, it is helpful to adopt each for at least a while (not necessarily at the same time).
I call this my ‘French and Indian’ opening suggestion. One advantage of having taught for so long is I get meaningful data from the amount of feedback from my suggestions. This tip/suggestion has been very successful; my students who have adopted it have overwhelmingly reported it to be effective.
Playing different openings helps you learn how to play in different pawn structures. It is fairly easy not only for some openings to evolve into French or King’s Indian Defense pawn structures, if not outright transpose into those openings. In addition, Black can often set up some of the common pawn structures in those openings against irregular early play. For example, if White opens with moves like 1.b3 or 1.g3 or even 1.f4 Black can often safely choose to set up the King’s Indian set-up with 1...Nf6, 2...g6, 3...Bg7, 4...0-0, 5...d6 (maybe in some other order, depending on what White does).
Here is an example of how a c3 Sicilian can easily become a French Defense: 1.e4 c5 2.c3 e6 3.d4 d5 4.e5 is the same position as
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 c5 4.c3.
Or the Blackmar-Diemer Gambit, a queen’s pawn opening, becomes a French when declined with 1.d4 d5 2.e4 e6. Many such transpositions are possible and common.
Tips #125 and #130 discussed pawn breaks; many lines of the French and King’s Indian lead to possible fixed centers with important breaks. In the French the center can be white d4/e5 versus black d5/e6, where Black breaks with ...c7-c5, and in the King’s Indian Defense, it may be the ‘mirror’ of that with white d5/e4 versus black d6/e5, and Black breaks with ...f7-f5.
You don’t have to play the French or King’s Indian very long if you play many speed games to learn the opening ideas well. It is quite possible to play hundreds of speed games in a couple of months. My guess is that if you try each opening for a reasonable period, you will get quite a bit out of each – even if you didn’t like them as much as some other openings! You can, and should, switch back or rotate on to other openings to learn more, and maybe get to positions you enjoy better.
Tip 141
Sometimes when you are out of your opening book, the process is as simple as ‘Does either side have a tactic? No? Then which is next piece I need to bring out and where should it go? Next man up!’
Many players play the opening like it is the middlegame. They look for a quick attack and tactics on every move after the first few. While these are sometimes possible, much more likely – and effective – is a quick mobilization of all the forces. Let’s consider a typical example:
Black to play
In the above position, Black to move, the first step is to make sure there are no tactics for either side. So far, so good, although just because the opponent does not currently have a tactic or a threat doesn’t mean that a proposed candidate move does not give him a new one: ‘Is my move safe?’
With no tactic in sight, quick development is the focus. Moving a second piece twice like 4...Ne4(?) ‘to occupy a key central square’ is just too early. Players who spend time analyzing ‘attacking’ moves like this often get into unnecessary time trouble later.
The double d-pawn set-up without White’s c4 dictates Black should probably play the break move ...c7-c5 sooner or sooner (think of this as a Queen’s Gambit pawn structure reversed). But Black also should castle as soon as possible, as White is already to castle and Black’s king’s bishop is in the way.
Therefore, the initial candidate moves should be 4...c5
or 4...Be7.
If you are not familiar with these positions and want to play 4...Bd6, that is not bad and the difference between that move and 4...Be7 is not worth too much time comparing the pros and cons (time management!).
However, 4...Bb4+ is questionable due to the AWL (Tip #94; Attack with something Worth Less) 5.c3. The engine thinks 4...Bb4+ is reasonable, but in most similar positions moves that allow these free AWLs are just a waste of time (or worse), and lower-rated players should probably not spend too much time considering them.
The engine also likes the prophylactic 4...b5, hindering White’s break move c2-c4. Again, if you are not a strong player it is just much better in many cases to get ready to castle. In quiet normal positions like this, both sides should be strongly influenced by the important principle:
Move every piece once before you move any piece twice unless there’s a tactic
(Tip #144).
I chose this ‘dull’ position because it is in just such positions where players who play too slowly try to do too much, which has a doubly bad effect: not only do they likely produce second-best moves, but also they use unnecessary time, which could be saved and used much more efficiently on future critical moves.
Tip 142
If you get taken out of your opening ‘book’, do not panic! Start taking your time, analyze carefully, and follow good opening principles.
On many occasions I hear from my students, “My opponent took me out of my book, so I did not know what to do and I panicked.” I often reply, “But how many games do you expect to play where your opponent doesn’t eventually make a move that takes you out of your book?”
The answer, of course, is that in almost every game you play, your opponent is eventually going to make a move which takes you out of your book knowledge! The rare exception might be if someone falls into an opening trap you know and resigns! But if something is going to happen almost every game, you should get familiar with that situation; panicking every game would become very tiresome.
In their book
Chess Rules of Thumb
, Alburt and Lawrence write that if your opponent makes a move where you are not 100% sure what the book reply is, you must treat it as if you are now relying on your analysis, so you should take a deep breath, slam on the breaks, and start thinking. Moving too quickly because ‘it’s the opening’ or ‘I think I know what the book move is’ can range from acceptable to disastrous, but, in any case, is dangerous.
Just for the fun of it, let’s put ourselves in the shoes of a typical amateur, take an opening sequence and pretend that we are out of our book – even if there actually is a substantial amount of book knowledge about that position. Suppose we are studying 1.e4 openings and after 1...e5, play 2.Nf3. Further, we have learned what to do if someone replies 2...Nc6 or 2...Nf6, but have not studied other moves.
Then let’s assume you are playing a slow game and someone answers
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3
with
2...d6
and you think ‘Oh no! What is that? I only studied 2...Nc6 and 2...Nf6. I am in trouble. What do I do now?’
Black is playing the Philidor Defense, common among amateurs but rare at the grandmaster level, and so not as heavily covered in opening books or videos.
White to play after 2..d6
First, you are not ‘in trouble’. Is Black’s move 2...d6 a dangerous check, capture, or threat? Hardly. Is 3...Bg4, pinning the knight to the queen, a threat? No, in fact it would violate Lasker’s Principle: ‘Do not pin the adverse king’s knight before your opponent has castled’ (this mainly applies to the kind of double king’s pawn opening that were played in Lasker’s day, and to which Philidor’s Defense belongs). Therefore, stopping the potential pin with 3.h3 is a big waste of time.
In this position the ‘book’ move is
3.d4!
, but we are pretending we don’t know that. What
do
we know from opening principles?
•
Move every piece once before you move any piece twice, unless there is a tactic
. That would suggest moves like 3.Bc4 or maybe the less active 3.Be2 to get out the king’s bishop and be ready to castle. It could suggest 3.Nc3. Or it might suggest 3.d3 or 3.d4 to allow the queenside bishop to develop, although 3.d3 unnecessarily blocks in the king’s bishop.
•
Develop the pieces on the side you are going to castle first
. It looks like White is going to castle kingside, so 3.Bc4 or 3.Be2 would do that. 3.Bb5+ looks aggressive, but it fails to the ‘Attack with something Worth Less’ (AWL) 3...c6 and the bishop must retreat.
•
Try to get some control of the center
. For this the best moves are 3.Bc4, 3.Nc3, and 3.d4.
Most amateurs play 3.Bc4, which is considered the second best move. But the main idea is to stop and think before deciding on any move, just as we did here.
Tip 143
In the opening if you win material, but it costs you development, then you want to catch up in development, not try to win a little more material (like more pawns).
A student was Black in a recent example game:
1.e4 e6 2.e5 d5
I prefer 2...d6.
3.d4 c5 4.Nf3
À la Nimzowitsch, but preserving the center with 4.c3 is normal.
4...Qb6
4...cxd4 would follow Tip #131.
5.Be3? Qxb2 6.Nbd2 Nc6
Better is 6...c4 to calm things down and facilitate further development.
7.Be2
Better 7.dxc5 or 7.Rb1 when White has some compensation. Notice how both players had trouble finding the right idea once the game became more abnormal and unbalanced.
7...Nxd4
7...c4 is still best.
8.0-0?
8.Nxd4! cxd4 9.Rb1 and White is actually better, despite his material deficit, as 10.Bb5+ is looming.
8...Nxe2+ 9.Qxe2
Now Black can take the pawn that is en prise on c2. Should he capture it?
Black to play after 9.
Q
xe2
9...Bd7(?)
Black correctly does not take the pawn, but does not find the most accurate continuation, instead unguarding his b-pawn and giving White skewer possibilities. Even worse was 9...Qxc2? 10.Qb5+ Bd7 (10...Kd8? 11.Rfc1 Qf5 12.Bxc5 wins) 11.Qxb7 Rc8 12.Nb3, with full compensation for the lost material.
Correct was the consolidating 9...Qb6, when 10.Rab1 Qc6 calms the board and allows Black time to finish his development.
10.Rfb1
The wrong rook. Correct was 10.Rab1 Qxc2 11.Rxb7 when Black needs to find 11...Qa4! to keep the advantage.
10...Qxc2(?)
Missing the opportunity to ‘freeze’ the b1-rook with 10...Qc3! and save the b7-pawn. Instead, the trade of the b7-pawn for the c2-pawn greatly favors White.
11.Rxb7
Now Black is far behind in development and there is only one move to keep the advantage.
11...Be7??
This is not the one. The only move to keep the advantage was 11...Qa4. Second best is 11...c4 with equal chances. What would you play here for White?
White to play after 11...
B
e7
The correct move is the sacrifice 12.Rxd7! I saw this possibility immediately. This represents the kind of move players rated 1200-1800 find in a combination book or software that holds up a sign that says ‘White to play and win!’ But in a game those same players make quiescent errors (Tip #44), and think ‘I can’t take the bishop; that would be a trade of a rook (Reinfeld value = 5) for a bishop (value 3) and I would lose the equivalent of two pawns (or points)’
But it’s not too difficult to see that after 12.Rxd7 Kxd7 13.Qb5+ Black not only cannot castle, but White’s lead in development is going to generate a winning attack even if he plays slightly inaccurate moves, e.g. 13...Kc7 14.Qa5+ Kc6 (other moves loses similarly) 15.Qa6+ (15.Nb3! is actually better) 15...Kc7 16.Rb1 and White wins the house.
I do not think players over 1800 would have to calculate too far or too exactly to realize that 12.Rxd7 does not give up too much material for the type of attack it generates. They don’t think ‘I can’t take the bishop; I lose material’, but rather ‘If I take the bishop and sacrifice the exchange, is it worth further investigation?’... and the answer would be ‘Yes!’
Instead, White played the developing
12.Rab1
when White is ‘only’ much better after the best replies 12...a6 or 12...Qa4. Black played
12...Nh6?
, again allowing 13.Rxd7!, but White played
13.Rb8+ Rxb8 14.Rxb8+ Bd8 15.Bg5
and Black has nothing better than
15...0-0
. White netted a piece with
16.Rxd8
and eventually won on move 31, although he gave Black some chances along the way.
Tip 144
The most important principle in the opening is: ‘Move every piece once before you move any piece twice, unless there is a tactic.’
This is not the
strongest
principle (Tip #29); there are several circumstances in a variety of openings that merit exceptions. But it is important because it can be applied to so many moves in every opening. How important is this principle? I like to tell the following story to my students rated under 1600:
About 30 years ago I was giving lessons to John Keir’s son, Clayton. John was an active member of our scholastic club and decided to become a United States Chess Federation (USCF) tournament director. After one event as a club director, he decided he wanted to move up to be a regular ‘local’ director, but to do so he needed to be a USCF-rated player.
For that reason, John played in one event and got an over-the-board rating in the 1100s.
His second event was the large National Chess Congress, at that time held at the Adam’s Mark Hotel in Philadelphia. John entered the Under-1200 section, which that year featured many promising juniors.
Despite these obstacles, John amazingly swept the section 6-0. He won about $580, which is more than I have won, in total, in my entire tournament chess career (the most I ever won in one event was for winning the Greater Philadelphia Closed Championship in 1973, which was $200; that is not as bad as it sounds if you adjust for inflation).
So, as soon as the final game ended, I asked John, “How did you do it? How did you manage to sweep only your second event, winning every game?”
John smiled and replied, “Simple. You know how you go over Clayton’s games and you are always saying ‘Move every piece once, before you move any piece twice, unless there’s a tactic?’ You must have told him 500 times.”
He went on, “So, I resolved that you would not be able to tell me that about any of my games. In every game I moved every piece once without moving any piece twice and castled, getting seven pieces into the game. My opponents, on the other hand, always managed to move several pieces more than once, so that in every game I had seven pieces out to my opponent’s three or four. Naturally with such a big advantage in development, I automatically got a strong attack. Then all I had to do was to be careful and not make any big tactical mistakes to give them free pieces. And thankfully, I did not, so I ended up winning all my games easily!”
I was startled that John had successfully implemented this important concept so readily – it seemed that all my lower-rated students (before and after!) had such a difficult time following this powerful idea. As a consequence of these experiences, my answer came quickly: “If
we could bottle that and sell it, we could make a fortune!”
This story is powerful, but it can be augmented with another amazing fact about
‘Move every piece once, before you move any piece twice, unless there is a tactic.’
In my coaching career, I have had private one-on-one lessons with over 700 players whose playing strength was low enough that they either did not know that principle or were violating it regularly to their detriment.
Of the first 300 I taught, upon hearing the principle none(!) were able to immediately incorporate it regularly and correctly into their play. Instead, they continued to have ‘better ideas’ and delayed their development, often with disastrous results. Of course, many were able to do it eventually. Then one day, about 15 years ago, I was instructing a young professor from Temple University. I taught him this principle and, amazingly, he was able to reasonably follow it in every game I reviewed afterwards. I told him he was the first student who was able to follow the principle immediately without further painful losses as lessons; he was quite surprised – he said he thought the advice was straightforward and easy to follow.
In the intervening 15 years there have been about 400 additional students who needed to learn this principle. Unfortunately, none have been able to duplicate the professor’s feat and follow it without further missteps; the lure of ‘having a better idea’ continued to attract them, at least for a while. The good news is that my students who do finally learn their lesson and follow this advice whenever it is reasonable to do so, reap clear improvement benefits.
Tip 145
Early in the game, in each non-tactical position, ask about each piece ‘What is this piece’s role in the early middlegame? Where should it go so it becomes active, and how can I feasibly, efficiently, and safely get it there?’
This is yet another aspect of ‘Use all your pieces all the time’ (Tip #111), ‘Make sure every piece has a future’, and ‘Which is next piece I need to bring out and where should it go?’ (Tip #141). You don’t want to make or have even one piece unnecessarily useless early in the game.
Some openings make it harder than others for certain pieces. For example, the French Defense 1.e4 e6 is notorious for Black’s bad queen’s bishop, leading to interesting lines like 2.d4 d5 3.e5 c5 4.c3 Qb6 5.Nf3 Bd7, intending on trading Black’s ‘bad’ bishop for White’s ‘good’ bishop with 6...Bb5. Is it worth the extra tempos to do this? Can White stop it? Those are the kind of questions that make openings fun and challenging for both sides.
Another frequent problem piece is Black’s queen’s bishop in some double d-pawn openings. Bringing it out too early to prevent this with lines like 1.d4 d5 2.c4 Bf5?! often runs into ideas like early Qd1-b3, attacking the light squares d5 and b7 on the queenside.
My students playing Black often run into the London System, and those that play the black side of lines such as
1.d4 d5 2.Bf4 Nf6 3.e3 e6 4.Nf3 c5 5.c3 sometimes wonder how to successfully activate their queen’s bishop.
Black to play
If Black now plays 5...Nc6, play might continue something like 6.Be2 Be7 7.h3 0-0 8.0-0 when 8...b6 gives Black the opportunity to support a later ...Bc8-Bb7 (to hinder White’s e3-e4 or support a possible Black ...Nf6-e4 once the knight on c6 moves), or even possibly ...a7-a5 and Bc8-a6.
But if Black leaves the knight on b8 and develops the kingside first with 5...Be7 6.h3 0-0 7.Be2 he has the possibility of playing 7...b6, and if 8.0-0 Ba6; like in the French, he is trying to trade his ‘bad’ light-squared bishop for White’s good one. This maneuver is not possible before castling since 5...b6 6.Be2 Ba6?? loses a piece to 7.Bxa6 (7.Qa4+? Qd7) 7...Nxa6 8.Qa4+, picking up the knight. For more on this tactic, see Tip #101.
The fight for making sure all the pieces have a role is obviously more important once you are out of your opening ‘book’ knowledge.
If at the point you get out of your ‘book; all your pieces are not yet active, playing carefully to make sure they can all become and remain so is a major goal of the opening
.
Tip 146
Do not play the opening like it is the middlegame.
Many of my students, who are representative of others in their situation, are tempted to ‘have a better idea’ in the opening and play it like the middlegame. For example, they want to threaten (no matter how inane or easily parried), and ‘attack’ at every chance they get, even if their forces are not yet in position to do so. I call this particular ‘better idea’: playing the opening like the middlegame.
Let’s review the three main goals of the opening:
• Activate
all
your pieces quickly, safely, efficiently, and effectively.
• Get some control over the center.
• Find a safe place for the king to spend the middlegame, preferably castling.
Steinitz suggested a premature attack is doomed to failure. Therefore, unless the opponent makes a tactical error or falls far behind in development, trying to attack in the opening is not only not a goal, it is likely harmful.
It is fairly easy to get examples for this tip! Here is one:
White to play after 7...
N
c6
In this recent amateur game, White is playing a Stonewall Attack and Black is defending with the reasonable King’s Indian set-up. The engine suggests White has equality with a move like 8.dxc5.
Instead, White played the incomprehensible (at least to a strong player)
8.Ng5?
. If we can read the amateur’s mind, perhaps he envisioned a mating attack where he follows with Qd1-e1-h4 and then tries to remove the guard of h7 by attacking the knight on f6. That’s pretty far-fetched and definitely violates IM Silman’s advice that for a plan to be seriously considered it should be both feasible and effective (Tip #113). But this is the opening; instead of attack White should be concentrating on how to finish developing his pieces.
Here’s a second example:
White to play after 9...
R
e8
The black rook has just placed itself on the same file as the white king, so White needs to continue his development with a safe move like 10.Nge2
(10.0-0-0?! b5! is a typical strong pawn sacrifice that’s good to recognize and understand; this position was discussed in Tip #116).
Instead White ‘attacks’ with
10.Bg5(?)
moving the bishop twice unnecessarily and after
10...h6
, putting the question to the bishop, goes
11.Bh4?
, “keeping up the pressure”, but losing material if Black finds the common discovery 11...Nxe4!. White should have cut his losses with 11.Bxf6 Qxf6 12.0-0-0 when Black is better, but there’s ample play.
White went on to get a completely lost position, down a piece. To complete the story Black, instead of keeping it simple when way ahead (Tip #85), had a later ill-advised counter-attack that instead lost the game!
Tip 147
If your opponent is not contesting the center, it is probably correct to advance more than just two pawns.
Suppose you are White and your opponent does not advance any pawns past the sixth rank, say 1...e6 and 2...b6 (but it could be many possibilities of doing this). After
1.e4 e6 2.d4 b6?!
developing the king’s knight to get ready to castle with
3.Nf3
is good, but suppose Black continues not challenging with
3...h6(?)
:
White to play after 3...h6
In similar positions I see many of my student play the reasonable 4.Nc3, but
Stockfish
has this as only the fifth best move at 37 ply, behind even the strange 4.a3. The best move is
4.Bd3
, following the principle ‘In closed positions, pieces are best placed behind the pawns.’ Not only does 4.Bd3 get White ready for quick castling, it leaves the flexibility of pushing the c-pawn before the queen’s knight is developed. This is illustrated by the engine’s best moves for both sides:
4...d6 5.Be3 a6 6.c4
, using the c-pawn as a third pawn to gain space in the center, without the queen’s knight blocking it:
Black to play – Position after 6.c4
We could have chosen different Black first moves, e.g.
1.e4 Nc6 2.d4 e6 3.Nf3 a6
when White’s highest-rated move is
4.c3!
Position after 4.c3
That extra central pawn is useful! While in many analogous positions it is acceptable to put both knights on f3 and c3, it is often more flexible and even aggressive to move either the c-pawn and/or the f-pawn early to gain more space, and/or support the central d- and e-pawns.
Tip 148
When you fianchetto g2-g3, b2-b3, ...g7-g6, or ...b7-b6, the pawn moves that go with them is often the d-pawn (with g2-g3 or ...g7-g6), and the e-pawn (with b2-b3 or ...b7-b6).
I sometimes see beginners open a game with 1.g3 and then 2.e3 (or vice-versa). When I ask them why they did that they sometimes tell me they want to give White’s king’s bishop on f1 extra mobility. This is a ‘noble’ answer, but it turns out the extra mobility is irrelevant because:
• The bishop on f1 is not going to stay there and enjoy the extra mobility; it is quickly going to develop to only one of those diagonals. So whichever diagonal you are going to use should determine the one pawn you are going to push, e.g. if you want the bishop on the long diagonal then 1.g3 and 2.Bg2 puts it there and playing 2.e3 just wastes time.
• 1.g3 and 2.e3 weaken the light squares on the kingside, notably f3, for little or no gain.
• Playing 2.e3 after 1.g3 puts two pawns on the c1-h6 diagonal of the other bishop, making White’s undeveloped dark-squared bishop on c1 more difficult to activate.
In the opening both bishops need to be developed so, for the king bishop, this requires moving the e- or g-pawn and for the queen bishop the b- or d-pawns. From the above we can deduce that all good openings require pushing at least two pawns, one of each ‘set’ that allow both bishops to activate.
Therefore, when White plays g2-g3, he will need to move either the b-pawn or the d-pawn at some point to activate the other bishop. The double fianchetto with b2-b3 (or even b2-b4) is certainly possible and does occur, but in most kingside fianchetto openings the other bishop is developed via moving the d-pawn.
Let’s consider the initial opening moves in the main lines of some popular openings where this would apply as one side or the other has an early fianchetto: the Queen’s Indian Defense, the King’s Indian Defense, the Grünfeld Defense, and the King’s Indian Attack.
The Queen’s Indian Defense starts out
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nf3 b6
. With this last move we can see that Black is one about to fianchetto here (or play ...Bc8-a6 in some lines) to develop his queen’s bishop. What is Black’s other pawn move? It is with the e-pawn so the other bishop can also be efficiently developed.
Queen’s Indian Defense: Black uses the b- and e-pawns to open lines for the bishops
Not only do Black’s b- and e-pawns open lines for the bishops, they avoid any weak square complexes as all the central squares either currently are, or can be, attacked by pawns. White has moved the d-pawn for his queen’s bishop, so naturally he will soon move either the e-pawn or the g-pawn to allow the other bishop to activate.
There are similar ideas for Black in the King’s Indian Defense, where the main line is
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6
. Instead of the b- and e-pawns, Black is using the d- and g-pawns to open lines for the bishops. Obviously if White moves both his central pawns (d- and e-pawns), that will open lines for both bishops and fianchettoing is not necessary. That is considered a more ‘classical’ development.
Looking at this same development “reversed” for White would be the King’s Indian Attack where White’s first five moves are often 1.Nf3 1...--, 2.g3 2...--, 3.Bg2 3...--, 4.0-0 4...-- and 5.d3. Again the d-pawn is moved after the fianchetto with the g-pawn.
In the Grünfeld Black uses the d-pawn, but pushes it do d5:
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5
. Still, it is that same combination of the d-pawns and g-pawn development to open lines for both bishops.
Hopefully next time you see a beginner open 1.g3 and 2.e3, or 1...g6 and 2...e6 for Black, you will wince a little. It is not disastrous, but if not played carefully, it could lead to problems fairly quickly.
Tip 149
In fianchetto openings, if the opponent plays
B
g5 (or against White, ...
B
g4) to attack a knight on f6 (f3) and, in addition,
B
xf6 (...
B
xf3) is not a threat, then it is usually correct to play ...h7-h6 (or h2-h3) immediately to ‘put the question’ to the bishop.
For example, after
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4 d6 5.Bg5
(this is called the Accelerated Averbakh System):
Black to play after 5.
B
g5
I call the bishop on g5 a
two-way bishop
because it is strong on both diagonals:
• On the h4-d8 diagonal the bishop exerts pressure on the knight and it becomes a pin if Black ever tries the center thrust ...e7-e5, as is typical in many King’s Indian lines.
• On the c1-h6 diagonal where it can pressure the weak square h6 and, if needed, return to support the center with a move like Bg5-e3 later.
Black does not want White to have this flexibility of the two-way bishop. For example, suppose Black continues ‘naturally’ with 5...0-0. Then White can play a move like 6.Qd2:
Position after 6.
Q
d2
In the above position it will be difficult for Black to displace the g5-bishop. But instead of castling, Black first inserts
5...h7-h6 (5...h6)
:
White to play after 5...h6
White must declare which diagonal he wants his bishop to occupy and this information will help Black decide how to proceed. If the bishop retreats to h4, it has less influence on the center and cannot form a battery with the queen along the c1-h6 diagonal. If Bxf6, Black will get the advantage of the bishop-pair; on other bishop moves, the pressure on the h4-d8 diagonal is relieved.
Tip 150
When one side fianchettoes, for example, Black with ...g6 and ...
B
g7, the plan to counter that with
B
e3,
Q
d2 and
B
h6 to trade off the bishops is often key in opposite-side-castling openings like the Sicilian Dragon Yugoslav Attack, the 150 Attack in the Pirc, or the Sämisch Variation of the King’s Indian. However, many amateur players feel like playing
B
e3,
Q
d2, and
B
h6 is
de rigueur
and try it every time when the opponent fianchettoes, and doing so in many situations is lukewarm at best and a waste of time in many.
Let’s first consider the 150 Attack in the Pirc where White can generate a strong attack quickly if Black plays too conventionally:
1.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6 4.Be3 Bg7 5.Qd2
(White can also play a similar system with f2-f3 or h2-h3 to protect the dark-squared bishop from ...Ng4)
5...0-0(?)
(this move is usually not played; instead, Black often starts developing the queenside in anticipation White will castle there)
6.0-0-0 Nbd7
(normal looking and a common move in similar positions at the amateur level, but again quicker central and queenside action is required)
7.f3!
(White is already getting ready to push his kingside pawns and get the much faster attack):
Black to play after 7.f3!
White’s attack will be faster and the engine already rates this as +1.3 for White. So this is an example where the plan of Be3, Qd2, and later possibly Bh6 is justified, although even here White could have played 7.Bh6, but getting ready for the pawn-storm first was better.
Now let’s consider a line in the Closed Sicilian:
1.e4 c5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.g3 g6 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.d3 d6 6.Nf3 Nf6 7.Be3 0-0 8.0-0 Rb8
:
White to play after 8...
R
b8
This is the type of positions where many amateurs automatically feel that White’s best plan is to ‘trade off the strong black bishop on g7 with Qd2 and Bh6’. Moreover, when playing Black, they will fear this threat, and meet 9.Qd2 with the ‘obvious’ 9...Re8, so as to preserve their bishop after 10.Bh6 with 10...Bh8.
But Black need not fear 9.Qd2. He could play 9...Ng4!, guarding h6 and also threatening to win the bishop-pair with 10...Nxe3. Suppose White plays
9.h3
(best is likely 9.a4)
9...b5 10.Qd2 e5 11.Bh6 b4 12.Bxg7 Kxg7 13.Nd1 Nd4
:
White to play after 13...
N
d4
Black is evaluated as better by about a third of pawn. The Be3/Qd2/Bh6/Bxg7 plan for White was nothing special and Black did not need to fear it or stop it.
Tip 151
In many e-pawn openings, if both d2-d3 and d2-d4 are equally safe, often d2-d4 is better/more aggressive. This includes most ‘irregular’ defenses, but some modern grandmaster lines in the Ruy Lopez and Italian are notable exceptions.
Over the years I’ve noticed in my lower-rated students’ games that they tamely play d2-d3 in many positions where d2-d4 is much more forceful. Let’s consider a couple of examples.
When Black plays the Philidor Defense, many lower-rated students meet
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 d6
with 3.Bc4 followed by a later d2-d3. This is solid, but White sometimes suffers through less space in the middlegame. Instead, the main line (going all the way back to Morphy versus the Duke of Brunswick and Count Isouard) is
3.d4
:
Black to play after 3.d4
3.d4
puts pressure on e5, thus ‘activating’ the knight on f3. It also sets the table for giving White more space in the middlegame. It is a more dynamic move.
A mid-level engine on the Internet Chess Club sometimes defends 1.e4 with the Center Counter Game (the Elephant Gambit in some lines), with
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 d5?! 3.exd5 Qxd5
(better is 3...e4)
4.Nc3 Qd6
.
White to play after 4...
Q
d6
In this and analogous positions I have seen multiple students continue their development with the solid 5.Bc4 followed by d2-d3 (possibly preceded by 6.0-0 depending on what Black plays on move 5). While this way of playing certainly is advantageous for White, it is not very dynamic and doesn’t attempt to fully punish Black’s insipid play. After 5.Bc4 Be6 White needs to find the tricky 6.Nb5! to maintain a strong advantage.
But the straightforward
5.d4
is even better. If Black tries to trade with 5...exd4 White can just play 6.Nxd4, when the open lines and excellent position of the white knights promise White a nice advantage. The engine slightly prefers the tricky 6.Nb5.
White can even finesse on move 5 with the strange-looking 5.Bb5+ when encouraging 5...c6 6.Bc4 is actually somewhat better than the immediate 5.Bc4. If Black develops a piece instead on move 5 with, say, 5...Bd7, then 6.0-0 gives White a large lead in development with, unsurprisingly, d2-d4 in many lines to open up the position, following the strong principle:
If you are castled and your opponent is not, then open the center to initiate a fight
.
There are many more examples where d2-d4 is much more aggressive than d2-d3. That does not mean, of course, that there are not many main lines in 1.e4 openings where d2-d3 is not only acceptable, but common grandmaster lines. I don’t wish to generalize too much, but I have seen enough amateur games where an aggressive d2-d4 is
not
played that putting that idea into a tip seemed like a good inclusion for this book!
Tip 152
When playing White against the French Defense, avoid the Advance Variation 1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 unless you are well-versed in that line.
Black to play after 3.e5
In the Lichess databases, 3.e5 is played 10% of the opportunities in master play (the classical 3.Nc3 is first with a full 50% of the games), but 3.e5 is played 29% in the amateur database, about three times as often. In general, the lower rated the player, the more often 3.e5 is played.
I believe that to the less experienced eye this move seems the ‘natural’ move. For weaker players 3.e5 to gain space is the likely way to ‘punish’ Black for his/her passive 1...e6 move.
From having played the French myself and watching tens of thousands of amateur games throughout the years, I can state that 3.e5, while a very respectable move if White is well-versed in the line, is also one of the fastest ways to get into trouble for players who don’t know much about openings. Usually, Black knows at least to play the break move
3...c5
and attack the d4-square. What often happens is either:
• The pawn on d4 falls to attacks from ...Nb8-c6, ...Qd8-b6 and ...Ng8-h6(e7)-f5.
• The e5-pawn falls when White does not play c2-c3 and Black plays ...Nb8-c6 and then ...c5xd4, removing the guard on the e5-pawn, or some combination of the two.
Here is a line from the Milner-Barry Gambit where an inexperienced White, as often the case, does not understand that Bf1-d3 is an implicit pawn gambit offer:
1.e4 e6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 c5 4.c3 Nc6 5.Nf3 Bd7
(5...Qb6 first may transpose when 6.a3 is now the most popular reply)
6.Bd3
(6.a3 or 6.Be2 are better)
6...Qb6
.
White to play after 6...
Q
b6
I see this position in amateur games quite a bit, and most of the time White does not understand he is best served by offering the Milner-Barry pawn sacrifice with 7.0-0. Therefore, in many cases amateur white players often panic, or at least fall into a deep think, seeing that 7.Be3 to guard d4 fails to 7...Qxb2.
One of the moves we sometimes see in this position is
7.Bc2?, to allow the queen to guard d4. This move is more often played at the amateur level than 7.Be2, which psychologically is difficult because the bishop could have been developed there earlier, so 7.Be2 would be admitting a mistake. But after 7.Bc2 cxd4 8.cxd4 Nb4, White should just give up the bishop-pair with 9.0-0 when Black may have a small advantage after 9...Nxc2 10.Qxc2 Ne7. However, if White insists of saving the bishop with 9.Bb3 (or 9.Ba4 Qa6! 10.Bxd7+ Kxd7 when White cannot castle and ...Nd3+ is threatened in many lines) 9...Qa6! gets a grip on the important f1-a6 diagonal, stopping White from castling.
Even when White plays the more normal 6.Be2 to allow the queen to continue to guard d4, 6...Qb6 7.0-0 Nge7 often confuses White, who wants to continue to guard d4 and b2.
White to play after 7...
N
ge7
White should play 8.Na3 or 8.dxc5! but those are often a little unnatural so he might try something innocuous like 8.Re1? when Black can cash in typical manner, with 8...cxd4 9.cxd4 Nf5 when d4 or b2 falls.
Another typical amateur line is 4.Bb5+ when after 4...Nc6 5.Nf3 Bd7 Black is threatening one of radio personality Howard Stern’s favorite tactics, 6...Nxe5 winning a pawn (6.c3? Nxe5 7.dxe5 Bxb5 or 7.Bxd7+ Nxd7)
There are many ways for White to go wrong and Black does not need much knowledge to find ways to take advantage of White mistakes. 3.e5 is a good move, but avoid it if you are not familiar with at least one main tabiya.
Tip 153
Botvinnik’s Rule is a good time management rule to use in the opening
.
Botvinnik’s Rules states:
In a ‘normal’ opening for a long time control game, try not to use more than about 20% of your time for the first 15 moves.
A ‘normal’ opening is one where the main idea is to activate all the pieces effectively, efficiently, and safely. In this respect ‘safely’ usually implies a minimum of complicated tactics that normally occur later in the game.
In the days when world champion Mikhail Botvinnik was active, there were not increments (or time delays) so the calculation was very easy. For example, if the time control was 40 moves in the first 2 hours (that and 40 moves in two and a half hours were common then for grandmaster play), then 20% of 120 minutes is 24 minutes. Therefore, we should subtract 24 minutes from 120 and say that a player should have about 96 minutes remaining on his clock for a 40 in two-hour time limit.
When would this not be wise or true? Suppose the opening was a Marshall Gambit and it goes ‘book’ for more than 15 moves. Then clearly you want to play all the book moves fairly rapidly to leave more time to think about moves in unfamiliar positions, so Botvinnik’s Rule would not apply.
The other clear exception would be a crazy opening like the Traxler Defense to the Two Knight’s Defense. Suppose you only know this for nine moves, but then the next six moves might be super critical (a piece is often sacrificed), and decide the game. If the game is possibly being decided within 15 moves, that is again an exception to Botvinnik’s Rule and obviously more than 20% of the time may be spent on the first 15 moves.
The math gets a little more complicated when there is a large increment. In that case just taking 20% of the ‘minutes’ portion of the time control and not including the increment will yield a wrong and misleading answer. Let’s take the common online slow time control of 45 minutes for a game with a 45-second increment.
If we wrongly ignore the increment, the rule would imply that we should take 20% (of 45) or nine minutes for the first 15 moves, leaving us with about 36 minutes after move 15. But that incorrectly ignores the fact than we have used 15 moves and received 45 extra seconds on each move.
So, let’s assume a 40 move game and see how many seconds we actually have. We have 45 minutes, which is 45 x 60 or 2700 seconds before adding the increment. Then we have 40 x 45 or 1800 extra seconds of increment (not insubstantial!). That gives us a total time of 2700+1800 = 4500 seconds for the 40-move games (obviously more if the game goes more moves, due to the increment).
20% of 4500 seconds is 900 seconds. But the first 15 moves yields 15 x 45 seconds = 675 seconds of increment. Therefore, the remaining time consumed that should be taken off the clock is 900 – 675 = 225 seconds of non-increment, or 3 minutes and 45 seconds. If we subtract that from the initial 45 minutes, Botvinnik’s Rule implies that we should have about 41 minutes and 15 seconds remaining on the clock after move 15 (that’s much more than the non-increment time of 36 minutes remaining).
The good news is that you don’t have to do all that calculation each time you play with a large increment. Simply add extra time to the ‘20% of the minutes’ to guesstimate how much time you should have left. For example, suppose the game is 30 minutes with a 30-second increment. Then 20% of 30 is 6 minutes, 30 minutes – 6 minutes is 24 minutes without an increment. Therefore, in this situation add a couple of minutes for a large increment and aim for about 26-27 minutes remaining on your clock; that’s close enough.
What do you do if you play too slowly and have less time remaining at move 15 than you should? I suggest students should ‘asymptotically’ speed up for a few moves to get back on track on how much time should be spent.
Another common error I see in students who understand and try to follow Botvinnik’s Rule is they feel so relieved on move 15 that they made it, that they slow down tremendously for moves 16-20, and ruin the cushion they have built up by not playing too slowly on the first 15 moves. Then they get into unnecessary time trouble and throw away the game on later moves, the very problem that Botvinnik’s Rule was designed to help prevent!
One last important point, which I was taught by watching Senior Master Ken Potts’s games. When playing rapid chess (say 30 0 or 30 5) with a low time increment, Botvinnik’s Rule is much too liberal on the optimum time to spend on the opening. For example, in 30 0 it would suggest having 24 minutes left on move 15. But Potts played much faster than that whenever he could, with the idea that ‘the shorter the time limit, the more you want to compress non-critical (opening) moves and leave time for critical later moves’.
Therefore, Ken would blitz the opening, often taking only 1-3 minutes for his first 15 moves instead of 6 minutes! This would leave him with more time for critical moves later, and often a decisive time advantage over opponents who would play the opening more slowly. I often saw Ken have an advantage on time of about 15 minutes to 5 minutes when the game got complicated around move 25-30. Not too many masters could give Ken that type of odds.
So, when the US Chess Federation made sudden death (all the moves in a certain amount of time) legal for slow rated games around 1980, a proliferation of 30 0 tournaments were held, and Ken Potts went up and down the East Coast with his time management ‘secret’, beating masters and raising his rating into the Senior Master (above 2400) level.
Chapter Seven
Endgames
This shorter chapter provides tips that address playing and learning the endgame, the phase with not only fewer pieces on the board, but the one that importantly requires the king to play actively. Because the endgame is not only critical, but has different principles than the remainder of the game, it is important to understand how these tips/principles differ than dealing with situations earlier in the game.
Tip 154
After learning how to checkmate with king and queen vs king and king and rook vs king, best is to learn well king and one pawn vs king because that forms the basis of many more complex endgames.
I think almost everyone understands that endgame study starts with basic checkmates: king and queen versus king (you cannot easily finish games without that one), and king and rook versus king. But after those, there is divergence of opinion. Some coaches progress to king and two bishops versus king and then the rare king and bishop and knight versus king. I don’t suggest that path, partly because these mates are relatively rare, plus you don’t need them to build into more common and important, endgames. Others go to well-known ‘exact’ endgames like the standard Lucena or Philidor rook and pawn endgames. A third approach might be to use non-exact practical endgames with several pawns and pieces.
My suggestion for the next endgame to study is
king and one pawn versus king. This endgame is extremely important not just because it occurs so frequently, but that pretty much all more complex endgames that involve pawns require some knowledge of king and pawn versus king. Why?
Because you cannot play an endgame well without having a good understanding if a trade is good or bad for you. In other words,
if you make a trade to a ‘simpler’ endgame, does that make the win (or draw, depending on your goal) easier, more difficult, or perhaps impossible?
Without this information, the decision to trade would have to be made on calculation (which could be both slow and error prone), or by a quick guess, which could be completely wrong and cost the game.
I like to use positions comparable to the following to illustrate the idea that knowledge of simpler (fewer piece) endgames is instrumental, if not totally a prerequisite, for studying endgames with more pieces:
Black to play
Black’s king is cut off from the defense to White’s d-pawn by the white rook controlling the e-file. Knowledge of the ‘Philidor’ endgame is not necessary to understand the following; it is just common sense that the black king would be better off if it could help stop the white pawn. But the only way for the black king to cross the e-file would be to use the black rook as a shield, say, after a move like 1...Re7. Unfortunately, this offers White the chance the trade rooks and go into a king and pawn versus king endgame.
But if Black knows the endgame is drawn after
1...Re7 2.Rxe7 Kxe7
, then 1...Re7 is not only a strong candidate move, it may be the only idea to save the game (it is not, but it is the simplest). However, if 1...Re7 leads to a trivial loss (it does not, but Black must know this), then it must be discarded and other attempts at defense need to be found. Finally, if Black does not know whether or not 1...Re7 works and has to calculate the lines, that could be inordinately slow and he might make an error in his evaluation.
The bottom line is clear. It is very difficult to study, and essentially understand, endgames which can eventually trade down into king and pawn versus king without studying those endgames first!
Tip 155
The king is worth about 4¼ pawns fighting value in the endgame
.
Everyone understands the king is ‘infinite’ trade value – losing it (i.e., being checkmated) is worth the entire game. But what is less commonly known is the king’s fighting value, which has been estimated at about 4¼ pawns. What does this mean?
Suppose we change the rules to state ‘the first side to capture all the opponent’s pieces wins’, and we offer as a starting position king and six pawns versus a piece (knight or bishop) and six pawns:
White to play
Which side would you rather have? If a king’s fighting value is much less than 4¼, then perhaps you would prefer playing Black and have the piece instead. But, when shown this example, almost everyone chooses the king’s side, whether it is against a knight or a bishop. Choosing the king is consistent with both pieces’ estimated average value.
One reason a king has more fighting value than the faster moving knight and bishop is that half the pieces on the board are pawns and a king can simultaneously attack a pawn and the square in front of it (the pawn’s potential move). Therefore, it is easier for a king to approach and win a pawn than it is for a knight or bishop. This ‘anti-pawn’ capability is powerful, especially in the endgame when pawn promotion becomes a major aspect and kings are safer to roam around, helping their own pawns and attacking opposing pawns.
Many of my lower-rated students are slow to activate their king once it is safe in the early endgame, especially when they are ahead. If they are ahead enough (let’s say a rook), then it is likely they can win the game without activating their king. But if they are ahead less than a rook, sometimes winning without using the king is difficult or even impossible, lacking those 4¼ pawns worth of fighting value. When a student is ahead a piece (knight or bishop), they often feel they can just move that piece around the board and win. But if it is just that piece versus the opposing king, they are often in for a rude shock until they realize they need their king, too.
Here is a sample position where Black can more easily activate his king, so his king has more ‘fighting value’:
Black to play
Black can use his king to attack the blockaded white d-pawn, while White’s king is far away from the action. Due to Black’s superior king activity, he won the pawn and the game. More on this example in the next tip...
Tip 156
In the endgame, the king’s average fighting value diminishes if you delay activating it and is greater if your king becomes very active.
The corollary is that a king should be activated as soon as it is safe to do so. In his book
The Wisest Things Ever Said About Chess
, GM Soltis suggests “it is usually safe to activate the king when the opponent has the equivalent of queen plus minor piece or less.”
As we discussed in the previous tip, the king’s average fighting value in the endgame is about 4¼ pawns. In my experience, one of the most common endgame errors of amateurs is simply waiting too long to activate their king. Instead, they often have ‘a better idea’ which turns out to be less effective.
Let’s take a more detailed look at the final example in the Tip 155. A few moves earlier, the position was:
White to play after 33...
N
d7
Black’s pawn structure is solid, but White has a dangerous passed pawn and Black’s king is a little exposed. If White would now play 34.h4! that alleviates back rank mates, guards the key g5-square, and gives White extra space. The engine rates that position as about +1.8 pawns for White. Instead White gives a meaningless check:
34.Qd5+? Qf7
Black would love to trade queens and get his king centralized. Once the queens are traded the d-pawn would look more like an isolated liability than a passed asset!
35.Qxf7+?
It is tough for anyone to admit their mistake, but I find that the lower rated the player, the less likely they are to ‘take their move back’. White should boldly retreat with 35.Qd2 and be content with a now small advantage.
35...Kxf7
The black king enters the fray near the action around the isolated d-pawn and now
Black
has a clear advantage. In this type of position, you can think of Black’s king as worth more than the average fighting value and White’s king as worth less!
36.Ng5+ Kg7 37.Kf1?
Possibly the losing move. Better was 37.f3 to allow the knight to support the d6-pawn with Ng5-e4 in some lines.
37...h6 38.Nf3
We have now arrived at the position from the previous tip.
38...Kf6 39.Nd2 Re6
Even more to the point is 39...Ke6 40.Nc4 Kd5.
40.Nc4 Re4 41.Rc1 Ke6 42.Re1 Rxe1+ 43.Kxe1 Kd5
Anyway. The double attack by the king nets the pawn and
Black won on move 62.
Sometimes in the endgame the king can be used as a valuable tempo machine, but is there a position where we can ‘freeze’ him out of even that role?
White to play
Black’s king is frozen so its fighting value is currently very small; any king move will allow the a-pawn to promote. But he has three(!) connected passed pawns versus the white king. In this well-known puzzle, can someone win or is it a draw?
After
1.Kg2 f6 2.Kg3 f5 3.Kf4 g6 4.Kg3 g5 5.Kg2 h5
(5...h6 6.Kg3 h5 7.Kg2 f4 8.Kf3 h4 9.Kg4 wins)
6.Kg3 g4
(6...h4+ 7.Kh3 also wins)
7.Kg2 h4 8.Kh2 f4 9.Kg1!
(the only move to win)
9...f3 10.Kf2 h3 11.Kg3 h2 12.Kxh2 f2 13.Kg2 g3 14.Kf1
White wins as Black will soon have to move his king and allow the a-pawn to promote.
Therefore, in this admittedly very special case, the active king is able to beat the inactive king even when the inactive king has three connected passed pawns.
Tip 157
If you have the option, do not trade into a king and pawn endgame unless you are almost certain you are going to get the result you want (win or draw).
GM Andrew Soltis once wrote that a grandmaster would never go into a king and pawn endgame against a 1900 player unless he was 100% certain to win. The reason is that all the GM’s advantages in knowledge would dissipate and it would simply become a pure analytical battle, and 1900 players might likely be able to calculate well enough to hold equal positions. But in other types of endgames there is much more knowledge and strategy involved, and much more chance for the lower-rated player to err.
Let’s give a couple of examples from students’ games. In the first game, my student was White and was down a pawn in a rook and pawn endgame.
White to play
If Black plays accurately, White is probably lost no matter what he plays, but the general principles are (*Tip Alert!*):
• King and pawn endgames are usually the easiest endgames to win with a slight advantage, and to lose with even a slight disadvantage. They are also the most calculatable.
• Single rook and pawn endgames are the second easiest to draw at a disadvantage, like being down a pawn. By far the easiest to draw with a disadvantage are bishops of opposite colors.
Therefore, if White was unable to calculate the possible trade of rooks as possibly leading to a draw (it doesn’t), on general principles he should avoid the trade. Instead he played
1.Rd2?
, which would have earned two question marks if he had not already likely been lost.
When I asked White after the game why he traded rooks, he said “I looked at the queenside and thought I could get my king over there faster than he could and attack his pawns.” Making moves on general ideas like this without doing any analysis to back it up I call ‘hand-waving’.
I don’t remember the exact continuation, but play went something like:
1...Rxd2+ 2.Kxd2 Kf6 3.Kc3 Ke5
(even 3...b5 should have been enough to convince White his idea of quicker king penetration was incorrect)
4.Kc4 Kd6 5.Kb5 Kc7
and White is losing. For example,
6.a3 Kb7 7.Kc4 Kc6 8.a4 b5+
(a cute tactical trick that’s good to know)
9.axb5+ Kb6
zugzwang!
10.Kc3 Kxb5 11.Kc2 Kb4 12.Kb2 c4 13.bxc4 Kxc4 14.Ka3 Kd3
and the white pawns fall.
In the second example my student was Black and in a bind:
White to play
White can trade off into a winning king and pawn endgame with 1.Qxe8+ Qxe8 2.Bxe8 Kxe8 3.h5! (3.Kg3? g5 is OK for Black) 3...Ke7 4.Kg3 Kd6 5.Kf4 Kxd5 6.Kxf5 and Black’s kingside pawns fall first.
Instead he took the less forcing – and wrong – way
1.Bxe8+?
, which allows Black a perpetual with 1...Qxh4+ 2.Kg1 Qe1+, etc.
But now it was Black’s turn to make a mistake with the ‘automatic’ recapture
1...Qxe8?
which would transpose into the losing line above if White would play 2.Qxe8+. The mistakes continued as White instead played
2.Qd6+? Qe7 3.Qf4
(here the trade of queens no longer works as Black’s king is one square closer: 3.Qxe7+?? Kxe7 and 4.Kg3 g5 or 4.h5 Kd6 wins).
Now Black erroneously offer a king and pawn endgame with
3...Qe4??
(equal is 3...Qf6 or 3...Ke8). White can now win with the straightforward 4.Qxe4 fxe4 5.Kg3 when the e-pawn falls. However, White fell for another common low-rated fallacy: ‘If my opponent offers a trade, then it must be good for him and bad for me, so I won’t do it.’ This logic is often incorrect for two reasons:
• The opponent may have made a mistake and the trade is bad for them.
• The trade may be good for the opponent, but it is very possible not trading is even better for them!
Therefore, White continued the parade of misconceptions with
4.Qd6+? Qe7 5.Qb8+ Kf7 6.Qf4 Kf6
, which should be equal after moves like 7.Kh3 or 7.Qf2. Instead, it was ‘Patzer sees a check, gives a check’ with
7.Qd4+??
,
a Hope Chess move allowing the obvious trade of queens with
7...Qe5+ 8.Qxe5 Kxe5
and Black’s remaining moves are easy:
9.Kg3 g6 10.d6 Kxd6 11.Kf4 Ke6 12.a4 Kf6 13.Ke3 Ke5 14.Kf3 g5 15.hxg5 hxg5 16.g3 Kd4
and
White resigned.
Tip 158
Zugzwang is not a rare endgame ploy used by high-rated players; rather it is a fairly common way to make progress in many endgame positions.
Sometimes when I instruct lower-rated players, they treat zugzwang (‘move-bound’ pronounced ‘tsug-tsvang’) as some exotic strategy, perhaps partly because the German name zugzwang sounds exotic to English-speaking newcomers. But understanding what zugzwang is, is not only fairly easy, but also essential to many basic endgame positions and ideas. Probably the easiest one is:
White to play and win
Even beginners can stumble upon the fact that the only two ways for White to continue to guard the pawn both win!
1.Kc6 Ke7 2.Kc7
followed by
3.d8
=Q
or
1.Ke6 Kc7 2.Ke7
followed by
3.d8
=Q.
What is more educational is explaining why this works: The rules of chess don’t allow Black to ‘pass; on his move, so because he is required to move, but doesn’t want to, he is forced to abandon his blockade of the passed pawn. This idea that Black is compelled to move and ruin his position is the basic idea of zugzwang.
Once students understand positions like this, it makes it easier for them to understand how similar situations with a variety of pieces can use zugzwang. For example, when I teach how to checkmate with a rook and king versus a king (which would not be a win without zugzwang, if the defender could pass!) and I use the ‘box’ method, it often arrives at a position identical (assuming various symmetries) to the following:
White to play
White wants Black’s king to go into the corner to he can mate him. Therefore, he simply wants to continue to guard the exit square h6 with his rook by moving it to any safe square on the sixth rank. I call this the ‘slidey rook maneuver’ because you can just slide the rook left to any square, e.g. 1.Rc6 Kh8 2.Rh6#.
White to play
A higher-rated student reached this position as White and a low-rated spectator whispered, “Draw!” and I replied “Watch!”
1.Ke3 Ke5 2.Be8
(zugzwang)
2...Kd5 3.Kf4 Kd6 4.Kf5 Ke7 5.Bd7 Kd8
(5...Kd6 6.Kf6 wins)
6.Ke5 Ke7 7.Kd5 Kd8 8.Kc5 Ke7 9.Kb5 Kd8 10.Ka6 Ke7 11.Kb7 Kd8 12.Kb8 1-0
It’s a further zugzwang.
Tip 159
If you are far enough ahead on material, sometimes ‘sacrifices’ are possible which make the win even easier.
White to play
I often use this position as an example during my lessons. I ask my students what they would play. Almost everyone sees the threat of a back-rank mate, and the most common answers are: 1.Qa1+,
1.Qb2+
and 1.h3.
I personally prefer the microscopically better 1.h4 to 1.h3, since the pawn is perfectly safe, and 1.h4 is both a defensive move (to stop the mate) and an offensive move (to cover g5 when the black king gets attacked). Moreover, without even giving the position to an engine, I am sure it would play a move like 1.Qb2+ and win quickly.
However, I have been in vaguely analogous overwhelming positions in speed games my entire life, and I would play none of those moves! Without hesitation in similar positions I always play
1.Qxd5
, eliminating my opponent’s final attacking piece. This usually elicits either wonder or a resignation, but, if they don’t resign, there’s nothing much for Black to continue playing. It doesn’t bother me that my queen is worth much more than the rook; I am following the principle (*Tip Alert!*):
When you make a trade of pieces, it often doesn’t matter what you are trading so much as how that affects the pieces left on the board.
In this case, leaving White with ahead a rook for a pawn makes the technique very simple with little counterplay.
If they continue with
1...exd5
then I realize a rook (worth about 5 pawns) does not fight well versus a king (4+ pawns) and the d-pawn (1 pawn for a total of 5+ for Black to fight in the middle), so I simply play
2.Kf1
with the plan of placing my king on the d-file, where it blockades Black’s passed pawn and neither the black king nor any of the black pawns can check it off the file. Plus, with the only rook, White’s king also cannot be put in zugzwang. That means Black now has absolutely no counterplay – a worthy goal when trying to ensure that only one outcome is possible!
1.
Q
xd5
also follows another worthwhile tip:
‘Permanent’ solutions are usually better than ‘temporary’ solutions
.
In this example a move like 1.Qa1+ is only a temporary solution because the queen has to continue to watch the back-rank mate. However, a move like
1.
Q
xd5
or even 1.h4 creates a more permanent solution such that it becomes difficult for Black to construct a possible future mating plan after those moves, while after 1.Qa1+ he can mate on the very next move if White absent-mindedly vacates the back-rank.
When you make a ‘sacrifice’ like
1.
Q
xd5
in the above position, you must be sure that the resultant position is an easy, if not easier, win. When my son was a weaker player he understood this principle, but he sometimes misapplied it, sacrificed material and made the win more difficult! I have occasionally seen a student make the same mistake – their intentions were good, but the result was detrimental. Of course, if you are in doubt as to whether the sacrifice makes the win easier, don’t do it!
Tip 160
If you reach a position, usually in the endgame, where you can’t lose unless you literally give away pieces, but you have the only chance to win, you don’t offer or accept a draw, no matter who you are playing.
Are there any exceptions to this tip? Sure; suppose you are playing without an increment (it could be a speed game) and you won’t have time to checkmate, then taking a draw could be wise. Or suppose you are having some personal crisis like a bad headache when you can’t play comfortably. But otherwise, if you can’t lose, have any advantage, and are not in a ‘dead drawn’ position where you have no chance of winning, then you should play for a win against anyone.
I tell the following story: when I was an expert, I was playing in one of the first World Opens and was paired with a 1900 player. As normal for me, I was a little rusty and got outplayed to the point where I had to sacrifice a piece for a bunch of checks, chasing my opponent’s king all over the board with just my queen, trying to get a perpetual check. I wasn’t sure I could, but the best I could do was draw, so I said to my lower-rated opponent “Obviously, I offer you a draw”. My wise opponent correctly replied, “Obviously, I decline” since the worst he could do was draw. I gave several checks, but eventually the draw was not there and I resigned.
One young promising player at our club demonstrated his endgame determination the night before I wrote this tip. Against a higher-rated opponent, he entered an endgame in the following position:
White to play
This is exactly the type of position to which this tip refers. Unless White falls asleep or puts his rook
en prise, he can’t lose but he has winning chances. Instead of timidly offering his higher-rated opponent a draw, the young man boldly and correctly chose to try to win. A little while later they reached this position:
White to play
White has cleverly and literally maneuvered Black into a corner. The engine says White has multiple ways of winning, but I liked best the move White played:
1.Rd8!
. I would have given the young man an ovation for finding an idea many his age would find daunting – he is simply running Black out of moves by taking away the bishop’s only safe square – but an ovation would be quite illegal, not to mention discourteous to his opponent.
All of Black’s replies are self-destructive. If 1...c3 the rook returns with 2.Rc8 and first the pawn falls and soon the whole black position. If 1...Kh8 then 2.Kg6 is one way to quickly win. So Black tried
1...h4!?
and White quickly played
2.gxh4
(after the game I suggested this was not such an obvious move, since getting only rook’s pawns makes sacrificing the exchange impossible in many lines; the engine thinks 2.Rd4! is the quickest win), and the game concluded:
2...c3 3.Rc8 Bd5 4.Rxc3 Bf3 5.h5 Be2
(Black is forlornly hoping for some type of drawing fortress against the rook pawns)
6.Rc8 Bf3 7.h6 Be2 8.Kg5 Bf3 9.Rc7+ Kh8 10.h7 Be2 11.Kh6
and Black resigned a move or two later.
Whenever you get a position with similar chances to our example, even if you do not know how to win, in the words of Bobby Fischer, “Try stuff!” Sometimes you are not winning but just better, but in the ensuing play your opponent might make a mistake (common at the lower level where tough defense is psychologically difficult) and you may win anyway. You have very little to lose by playing on, no matter how much higher-rated your opponent may be.
Tip 161
In the endgame if you have a king and a non-rook’s pawn and anything else (pawn, knight, bishop...) vs a king, you can almost always win just by advancing your king and pawn, using the extra piece at the end to put opponent in zugzwang, then promote
.
White to play
For example,
1.Kf1 Kf4 2.Kf2
. A few instructors call this ‘the opposition’, but I reserve that designation for positions where the offensive king is in front of the pawn because, in this position – with or without the knight on a1 – it doesn’t matter whose move it is, so the idea of having ‘the opposition’ should not apply (Tip #164).
White wins as follows:
2...Ke4 3.e3 Ke5 4.Kf3 Kf5 5.e4+ Ke5 6.Ke3 Kd6 7.Kd4 Ke6 8.e5 Ke7 9.Kd5 Kd7 10.e6+ Ke7 11.Ke5 Ke8
(without the knight, this retreat along the same file as the pawn would be the only move to draw once the pawn is on the sixth rank)
12.Kd6 Kd8 13.e7+ Ke8 14.Nb3
(here
any move by any piece
in a similar position that does not cover d7 and stalemate wins the crucial tempo)
14...Kf7 15.Kd7
and
16.e8
=Q wins.
The important point is that the ‘tempo wasting’ knight move on move 14 could be by any piece – it could be a second pawn or a bishop (a rook would not need promotion). I have seen many players with two connected pawns push both pawns and then had to be careful to avoid stalemate. My suggested method of just pushing one pawn is an easy way to win most endgames with any non-rook’s pawn and anything else against a lone king. This method also often works if both sides have equal extra pawns that are fixed and cannot create a passed pawn (e.g. add a white pawn on a4 and a black pawn on a5 in the example above).
Tip 162
In rook and pawn endgames, it is often better to be down a pawn with an active rook than be even on material with a passive, tied-down rook.
Here is a well-known example:
Black to play
The only way for Black to save the pawn is the ‘obvious’ 1...Ra8, a move that most lower-rated players might choose fairly quickly. But the engine does not rate 1...Ra8 among the top six moves!
After
1...Rc3!
(activating the rook and cutting off the white king)
2.Rxa7 Ra3
(rooks belong behind passed pawns!) the engine rates the position as dead even despite White’s extra pawn.
But suppose Black passively defends the pawn with 1...Ra8(?), giving the white king free reign of the board. Further assume that Black will now just keep his rook on a8 guarding the pawn and daring White to make progress. Play might continue 2.Kf3 g6? (2...Re8! is still possible with equality) 3.Ke4. Now White’s king is heading for b7 and there is no defense, e.g. 3...Kg7 4.Kd5 Kf6 5.Kc6 Rb8 Too late 6.Rxa7 Rb2 7.Rc7 Rxf2 8.a7 Ra2 9.Kb7 Rb2+ 10.Kc8 Ra2 11.Rc6+ Ke5 12.Kb7 Rb2+ 13.Rb6 and White wins.
From the above example we can see that having a passive rook and giving the opponent free rein of the board is often disastrous. Hence the idea that an active counter-attacking rook might be superior in many positions to a rook tied down to inactivity in protection of a pawn. Of course, there are exceptions so, as with many endgame decisions, choose your plan and moves very carefully.
Tip 163
In endgame positions where one side has an ‘outside’ passed pawn – and thus logically the opponent has the ‘inside’ passed pawn – the player with the outside passed pawn should push it as a decoy only so far as to be able to capture the inside passed pawn.
Pushing the outside passed pawn further than needed to deflect the defending king is rarely helpful and often harmful.
White to play
Many authors call the a-pawn in similar positions without the black d-pawn the ‘outside passed pawn’, but I only call it that if there is another passed pawn to compare it to – in this position represented by the black d-pawn – which I guess we could call the ‘inner passed pawn’.
White should naturally push the a-pawn to deflect the black king away from the d-pawn:
1.a6 Kc6 2.a7 Kb7
. But here is where I have seen a multitude of amateur players misplay similar positions:
White to play after 2...
K
b7
Using our tip, we know the correct move is
3.
K
xd5
. Let’s see what happens if White instead plays the tempting 3.a8=Q??, which proponents defend by suggestion it “lures the black king further away”: 3...Kxa8 4.Kxd5 Kb7 5.Ke5 Kc7 6.Kf6 Kd7 7.Kg6 Ke7 8.Kxh6 Kf7 9.Kh7 (or 9.Kg5 Kg7) 9...Kf8 10.h6 Kf7 is a draw.
But after the correct
3.Kxd5
we see that
3...Kxa7 4.Ke6 Kb7 5.Kf6 Kc7 6.Kg6 Kd7 7.Kxh6 Ke7 8.Kg7
wins.
The reason 3.a8=Q?? is detrimental is that the distance from a7 to the drawing key squares, f7 and f8, is identical to the distance from a8 to f7 and f8 (both five king moves). Therefore, the tempo spent on 3.a8=Q is completely wasted as it does not push the black king further away from where it will need to go next. White needed that tempo to capture the pawn on d5; in all cases the black king needs to move to the a-file anyway even if White does not push the a-pawn any further.
At worst (as in this example) pushing the outside pawn when the inside pawn is vulnerable costs a tempo that throws away the win; at best (if the remaining pawns were situated otherwise), it would not be helpful. From this analysis we can conclude that the tip to only push the outside passed pawn far enough to deflect the defending king away from defending the ‘inside passed pawn’ makes sense in almost all similar positions.
Tip 164
The term ‘opposition’ is often used inconsistently in many king and pawn endgame explanations, so beware of the distinctions.
Showing the king and non-rook’s pawn plus anything versus king example in Tip #161 did raise a relevant, interesting question I have talked about quite frequently (the situation occurs often in actual play), which is the differing use of the term ‘opposition’. I think everyone uses that term to describe what is happening when you have a king directly in front of a pawn that is on the fourth rank or lower, with the opposing king across (Diagram 1):
Diagram 1- Either side to play determines ‘the opposition’
As any endgame text will tell you, in Diagram 1 White to play gives Black the opposition and, with correct play, Black can draw:
1.Ke4 Ke6 2.d4 Kd6 3.d5 Kc7
(any move but 3...Kc5?? draws)
4.Ke5 Kd7 5.d6 Kd8! 6.Ke6 Ke8 7.d7+ Kd8 8.Kd6
stalemate.
But, if it is Black’s move,
White
has the opposition and can win:
1...Ke6 2.Kc5 Kd7 3.Kd5 Ke7 4.Kc6 Ke6 5.d4 Ke7 6.d5 Kd8 7.Kd6 Ke8 8.Kc7
followed by d6-d7-d8=Q.
However, if the pawn is not far advanced and the offensive king is not in front of the pawn (Diagram 2) then, even though the kings are separated by the same ‘one square in-between’ that marks close opposition, I think all authors realize it does not matter who is to move, and generally agree on
not
using the term ‘opposition’ to apply to this situation:
Diagram 2
–
Either side to play: no opposition
Diagram 3
–
Black to play
The third diagram shows a standard drawn position if Black knows to play directly back along the file with 1...Kc8.
However, suppose Black blunders by moving back diagonally
1...Kd8??
and White responds
2.Kd6
:
Diagram 4 – Black to play: does White have the opposition?
Authors and instructors will correctly say that Black’s move is an error, but my point involves the nomenclature some use to describe this error. Many, if not most, will say 1...Kd8?? is wrong because “2.Kd6 gives White the opposition” as Black loses after 2...Kc8 3.c7 (zugzwang) 3...Kb7 4.Kd7.
However, I feel calling the situation in Diagram 4 ‘the opposition’ is questionable, if not incorrect, since those same authors, faced with Diagram 2 and a visually comparable situation (offensive king next to the pawn) with the pawn lower than the sixth rank, don’t call it the opposition! This discrepancy is attributable to the requirement in Diagram 4 that it matters who is to move, while in Diagram 2 it does not.
I think calling the situation in Diagram 4 ‘getting the opposition’ is confusing and inconsistent. When the position has just king and one pawn versus king and the kings are close to each other (not the ‘distant opposition’), I would prefer to reserve the term ‘opposition’ to only cases where the offensive king is in front of the pawn.
In positions like Diagram 4 where it matters who is to play, but the king is not in front of the pawn, then it is a matter of tempi, but not (in my humble opinion) ‘the opposition’ since then we would have to extend the definition of ‘opposition’ to include cases where the king is beside a pawn, but it matters whose move it is – and possibly others as well.
In cases where there is more material on the board, I can understand ‘opposition’ being used in a variety of situations. I admit it is all a matter of semantics, but, whenever I see someone explain Diagram 4 as Black “giving up the opposition”, I grimace a little since they would not say that if Black had safely moved back diagonally when the pawn was on a lower rank. I think my use of ‘opposition’ is more consistent for the reasons stated above. Show these positions to your local author and/or master and see what he/she says...
Epilogue
Final Tip:
All the tips in the world will not help you if you do not do the work.
Just as all the chess knowledge in the world will not help you much if you don’t know how to analyze, evaluate and manage your time, these chess tips just help provide direction. But you should take these suggestions and do positive things with them in order to get any real benefit.
For example, if you know you should master basic tactics before you get the full benefit of intermediate tactics, it won’t help you if you don’t do repetitious easy tactics almost on a daily basis until you can recognize a high percentage of them quickly and accurately.
Similarly, if you know that you need to activate your king as soon as it is safe in the endgame but you ‘have a better idea’ and delay it, that knowledge will not help much.
If you know to ‘move every piece in the opening once before you move any piece twice unless there is a tactic’, but again have better ideas and consistently delay getting all your pieces activated, the knowledge of that principle is rather moot.
We can go on and on with examples, but you get the idea: the knowledge of the tips in this book is helpful, but only to the extent that you believe them and use them actively and wisely. I use the term ‘have a better idea’ when a student makes a mistake, learns what they should do next time, and then makes a similar mistake again even if they knew what to do the second time because of some reason (‘better idea’) that almost always was less important than just following the advice they learned.
The willingness to follow the advice you have been given is called ‘coachability’. I have seen coachability listed as an important trait in many sports; not just chess. Some players are very talented, but either will not listen to advice or are stubborn and only do ‘their work’ instead. In either case, they are either less likely to reach their potential.
Some of my students wait for me to give them an epiphany that will make them a much stronger player. Occasionally I can give them one that gives them that ‘Aha!’ moment that breaks a rut or propels them to the next level. But much more often the epiphanies have a limited half-life and what propels them to the next level is them doing a great amount of useful work! Hopefully you can do it!
Table of Contents
Title page
About the Author
Bibliography
Introduction
1) General Improvement
2) Thought Process
3) Psychology
4) Tactics/Safety
5) Positional Concepts and Strategy
6) Openings
7) Endgames
Epilogue